







Salem Mass February 12 1858. 

Sir.

I last had the honor of receiving
from the State Department a despatch of Nov 21,
1857 extending my leave of absence from the U.S.
Coml Agency at St Paul de Loanda till March 58.

I avail myself of this opportunity to inform 
you that I now intend to leave this port for Loanda
during the next month &amp; would very respectfully 
request your notice of a few remarks in relation to
the Commercial Agency at that port.

By referring to my former despatches you
will please perceive I have frequently alluded to
the "order" of the Portuguese Government of depositing
the Registers of American vessels with the Custom
House authorities at Loanda instead of with the
U.S. Coml Agent. I have during my stay there
used my best exertions in endeavoring to have the
Registers in my possession while the vessel remained
in port, but the Governor would not allow me to keep
them. As I consider this "Order" conflicts with the
U.S. Law of Feby 28, 1803, I would respectfully
request some further instructions on this subject.

There is also a very important subject which
I wish to bring to the notice of the Department viz.
The subject of a "Burial place in Loanda for American
Citizens." The English some years since had a
small lot of Ground granted them by the Portuguese
Government for this purpose. In October 1856 I
had occasion to request the Resident English Commissioner
or Arbitrator (Mr E. Gabriel) for the privilege of
burial in their Cemetery of an American Ship master
(Capt Wells of the Brig Charlotte of New York) who
died in the Congo River on the 13th Sept. whose body



was placed in a Cask of Rum &amp; and brought to Loanda
in said Brig. but through some misunderstanding Mr 
Gabriel finally declined to have the body placed there
unless it was taken out of the Cask &amp; and placed in a Coffin.
I requested the Governor to give me liberty to employ the 
Physico Mor to arrange it, but on account of some fears
they had in respect to contagion the Government declined
&amp; the body was buried with the Cask in the vicinity.
If your honor will direct the U.S. Minister at Lisbon
to apply to the Portuguese Government for a small lot of
Ground for this purpose, I have no doubt but what they
would comply with the request. I would add that it
would not be necessary to go to any expense at present
as regards fencing &amp;c The English have not as yet expended
anything on their grounds, but I understood there
had been an application made to Government for an
Iron fence, as a Wood fence would not last any length
of time.

I would request permission in case of sickness,
to leave my post for a longer time than the ten days if necessary.

I notice in the List of Diplomatic Consular
&amp; other Agents of the United States, that I am the
only Coml Agent in the Portuguese Dominions &amp; if the
Department would make this office a "Consulate" instead  
of Coml Agency it would have a good effect on the Government
at Loanda.

I have also to request the Department to send
me a flag, also a small flag for a Boat, &amp; if you think
it advisable to change the Office to a Consulate, to
send me at the same time a Seal of Arms.

The Slave Trade has been of late carried on to
a great extend on the S W Coast of Africa by vessels 
sailing from Ports in the U. States &amp; Havana some of



which are owned by Portuguese living in New York 
who through some Ship Brokers manage to elude the 
vigilance of the U.S. authorities in that City.

This System interferes very much with those engaged
in legal trade as they in order to make a good appearance
at the Custom House, have a regular Cargo, which
when the vessel arrives on the Coast is forced on the
market at any price.

The English Commanders of Government vessels
on the Coast have in many instances taken great liberties
with American Vessels, &amp; the presence of one or
more U.S. Vessels is very important  for legal &amp;
illegal trade. The weather on the S W Coast is always
good &amp; the harbour of Loanda is very fine. good
Water &amp; Provisions of all kinds can always be procured
there at much cheaper sales than elsewhere on the Coast.

Any communication you may have to forward 
me, please direct to Salem, Mass.

Very Respectfully
Your Obt. Servt.
John G. Willis
U.S. Coml Agent, at St Paul de Loanda


To the
Hon. Lewis Cass
Secretary of State. U.S.A.
Washington D.C.




