







Department of State Received Mar 2 1885

United States Consulate
St Paul de Loanda
January 12th 1885

Sir

In reply to your despatch No 8 I have the honor
to enclose copies of despatches Nos 1 to 4 received from
Mr Du Verge which will prove that he left the Congo River
in November of 1883 per ss "Senegal" for Liverpool

When he left for the Congo in July of that year
he handed the Archives over to me as per enclosure
No 1, at the same time offering me £10 per month to
cover Clerks expenses. On November 26th as per 
enclosure No 3 he advised me that he had forwarded
me two drafts to cover my account; viz for the £10 per
month and other money I had advanced to him.

These Bills I received and forwarded for 
payment to America, but they were refused payment
Mr Du Verge I believe having countermanded the advice
of same, stating that he was not in his proper state
of mind when he signed them. Altogether
Mr Du Verge has swindled me out of about £150 
and during his stay here, he has behaved in such
a manner, that I am afraid it will be difficult
for any other American Consul coming here
to get



to get his Bills cashed.

After he left for Liverpool I was in full charge
of the Consulate and had us arrangement with him
with regard to division of salary and I consider
that I am entitled to the full amount of salary
allowed me by law

I hope that the documents enclosed will be
sufficient to authorize you to give orders, to pay the
Bills I have drawn on the Department as the non
payment of same puts me to great inconvenience

I have the honor to be
You most Obedient Servant
Robt S. Newton
US Vice Consul

To the
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington DC.



United States Consulate
St Paul de Loanda SWC. Africa.
July 17th 1883.

Sir,

According to instruction in despatch Nos 12 &amp; 15
from State Department, Washington D.C. I will
leave by the Portuguese Mail Steamer "Benguella"
for my Northern Jurisdiction, and visit in the
meantime the agencies established there.

I therefore leave to your care the Office of this
Consulate with all its belonging and remit you
herewith the Key of the Consulate Office door.

Knowing however that you are very busy
for the present, I allow you £10 per month
from date for Clerk help in your official
duties.

I have the honor to be
Sir
Your obedient Servant
(signed) L. de R du Verge
U.S. Consul



United States Consulate
Banana. Congo.
November 3rd 1883

Robert S. Newton Esq.
U.S. Vice Consul
St Paul de Loanda

Sir,

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
and to thank you for all the letters and papers
you have forwarded me since my departure.

I would also state that I am leaving for
Europe and the United States by the first English
or Portuguese Mail Steamer according to leave
of absence from the Department of State

As soon as I have answered all my 
despatches and get my reports &amp;c &amp;c in the Congo
sent home, I will forward you the United States Despatch
Book and Seal and will thank you to be good enough
on receiving the same, to send me a full receipt &amp;
also an Inventory of all property belonging to the United
States Government, which I delivered to you when
leaving St Paul de Loanda

Trusting you will still keep good health &amp;
that your business will increase daily

I remain Sir
Yours Respectfully
(signed) L de R du Verge 

over



Please forward all letters &amp;c to:
Captn L de R du Verge
c/o Messrs Hicks &amp; Bell
68 South Street
New York U.S.A.



Liverpool England
January 31st 1884.

Robert S. Newton Esq.
US. Vice Consul
St Paul de Loanda

Sir,

By reason of continued sickness ever since I left
St Paul de Loanda according to instruction for leave of
absence, by despatch No 12 and 13 I have been unable
to copy the Despatches and Reports forwarded to the State
Department and US.

I therefore beg of your kindness to leave all the pages
marked thus "✓" untouched so that by sending
you copies of the abovementioned despatches &amp; reports
you will be able to have them copied.

I forward this Despatch Book and the US Consular
Seal through Messrs Elder Dempster &amp; Co and truly
hope that they will reach you all right. Please send
me as soon as possible the full Inventory of Consular
and US Property now under your care as I do not
intend to go to Africa and live among Portuguese
Convicts any more

I truly hope that the brothers Silveira are by this
time free and are gone to the US.

I am Sir
Respectfully
(Signed) L de R du Verge
US Consul.




