









The Black Fairy

By Fenton Johnson





Little Annabelle was lying on the lawn, a volume of Grimm before her. Annabelle was
9 years of age, the daughter of a colored lawyer, and the prettiest dark child in
the village. She had long played in the fairyland of knowledge, and was far advanced
for one of her years. A vivid imagination was her chief endowment, and her story creatures
often became real flesh-and-blood creatures.

"I wonder," she said to herself that afternoon, "if there is any such thing as a colored
fairy? Surely there must be, but in this book they're all white."

Closing the book, her eyes rested upon the landscape that rolled itself out lazily
before her. The stalks in the cornfield bent and swayed, their tassels bowing to the
breeze, until Annabelle could have easily sworn that those were Indian fairies. And
beyond lay the woods, dark and mossy and cool, and there many a something mysterious
could have sprung into being, for in the recess was a silvery pool where the children
played barefooted. A summer mist like a thin veil hung over the scene, and the breeze
whispered tales of far-away lands.

Hist! Something stirred in the hazel bush near her. Can I describe little Annabelle's
amazement at finding in the bush a palace and a tall and dark-faced fairy before it?

"I am Amunophis, the Lily of Ethiopia," said the strange creature. "And I come to
the children of the Seventh Veil."

She was black and regal, and her voice was soft and low and gentle like the Niger
on a summer evening. Her dress was the wing of the sacred beetle, and whenever the
wind stirred it played the dreamiest of music. Her feet were bound with golden sandals,
and on her head was a crown of lotus leaves.

"And you're a fairy?" gasped Annabelle.

"Yes, I am a fairy, just as you wished me to be. I live in the tall grass many, many
miles away, where a beautiful river called the Niger sleeps." And stretching herself
beside Annabelle, on the lawn, the fairy began to whisper:

"I have lived there for over 5,000 years. In the long ago a city rested there, and
from that spot black men and women ruled the world. Great ships laden with spice and
oil and wheat would come to its port, and would leave with wines and weapons of war
and fine linens. Proud and 



great were the black kings of this land, their palaces were build of gold, and I was
the Guardian of the City. But one night when I was visiting an Indian grove the barbarians
from the North came down and destroyed our shrines and palaces and took our people
up to Egypt. Oh, it was desolate, and I shed many tears, for I missed the busy hum
of the market and the merry voices of the children.

"But come with me, little Annabelle, I will show you all this, the rich past of the
Ethiopian."

She bade the little girl take hold of her hand and close her eyes, and wish herself
in the wood behind the cornfield. Annabelle obeyed, and ere they knew it they were
sitting beside the clear water in the pond.

"You should see the Niger," said the fairy. "It is still beautiful, but not as happy
as in the old days. The white man's foot has been cooled by its water, and the white
man's blossom is choking out the native flower." And she dropped a tear so beautiful
the costliest pearl would seem worthless beside it.

"Ah! I did not come to weep," she continued, "but to show you the past."

So in a voice sweet and sad she sang an old African lullaby and dropped into the water
a lotus leaf. A strange mist formed, and when it had disappeared she bade the little
girl to look into the pool. Creeping up Annabelle peered into the glassy surface,
and beheld a series of vividly colored pictures.

First she saw dark blacksmiths hammering in the primeval forests and giving fire and
iron to all the world. Then she saw the gold of old Ghana and the bronzes of Benin.
Then the black Ethiopians poured down upon Egypt and the lands and cities bowed and
flamed. Next she saw a great city with pyramids and stately temples. It was night,
and a crimson moon was in the sky. Red wine was flowing freely, and beautiful dusky
maidens were dancing in a grove of palms. Old and young were intoxicated with the
joy of living, and a sense of superiority could be easily traced in their faces and
attitude. Presently red flame hissed everywhere, and the magnificence of remote ages
soon crumbled into ash and dust. Persian soldiers ran to and fro conquering the band
of defenders and severing the woman and children. Then came the Mohammedans and kingdom
on kingdom arose, and with the splendor came ever more slavery.

The next picture was that of a group of fugitive slaves, forming the nucleus of three
tribes, hurrying back to the wilderness of their fathers.

In houses built as protection against the heat the blacks dwelt, communing with the
beauty of water and sky and open air. It was just between twilight and evening and
their minstrels were chanting impromptu hymns to their gods of nature. And as she
listened closely, Annabelle thought she caught traces of the sorrow songs in the weird
pathetic strains of the African music mongers. From the East the warriors of the tribe
came, bringing prisoners, whom they sold to white strangers from the West.

"It is the beginning," whispered the fairy, as a large Dutch vessel sailed westward.
Twenty boys and girls bound with strong ropes were given to a miserable existence
in the hatchway of the boat. Their captors were strange creatures, pale and yellow
haired, who were destined to sell them as slaves in a country cold and wild, where
the palm trees and the cocoanut never grew and men spoke a language without music.
A light, airy creature, like an ancient goddess, flew before the craft guiding it
in its course.

"That is I," said the fairy. "In that picture I am bringing your ancestors to America.
It was my hope that in the new civilization I could build a race that would be strong
enough to redeem their brothers. They have gone through great tribulations and trials,
and have mingled with the blood of the fairer race; yet though not entirely Ethiopian
they have not lost their identity. Prejudice is a furnace through which molten gold
is poured. Heaven be merciful unto all races! There is one more picture—the greatest
of all, but—farewell, little one, I am going."

"Going?" cried Annabelle. "Going? I want to see the last picture—and when will you
return, fairy

"When the race has been redeemed. When the brotherhood of man has come into the world;
and there is no longer a white civilization or a black civilization, but the 



civilization of all men. I belong to the world council of the fairies, and we are
all colors and kinds. Why should not men be as charitable unto one another? When that
glorious time comes I shall walk among you and be one of you, performing my deeds
of magic and playing with the children of every nation, race and tribe. Then, Annabelle,
you shall see the last picture—and the best."

Slowly she disappeared like a summer mist, leaving Annabelle amazed.






