







Loango March the 13th 1883.

To the Commander of the French War Vessel 
To anchor in Loango 

Sir.

Having heard from several white men, that you had, or were going to take Possession
of this Country, in the name of the French Government, and having heard also that
the Natives in that case would out of revenge, attack, plunder, and destroy the several
trading houses in this place, and afterwords take to the bush, I, undersigned a citizen
of the United States of North America doing business in this place, and in other points
near here, having American and British property in charge, find myself obliged to
address you the following considerations

That it is almost certain that as soon as the Natives find out that you are taking
possession of their country, they will out of revenge, attack the factories, and plunder
and destroy everything, thus entailing ruin on innocent traders, who have nothing
whatever to do with these questions.

That the presence of your vessel, will not deter them from so doing, as they will
very likely make a night attack, and by making it general preclude the possibility
of the white men helping each other.

That as soon as they have plundered and destroyed the Factories, killing very likely
also some of the white men, they will take to the Bush, as the loss of their villages
is as nothing to them, making it impossible to find and punish them.

Considering these Circumstances, the Undersigned think it incumbent to him, as a citizen
of the United States



of America, as proprietor and Agent, having American and British
property in charge, to formally protest against you and the
French Government individually and collectively, for any loss or
damage that may accrue to him through any through any 
Acts caused by yours or by the French Government orders,
including additional expenses and loss of time or any other damage
direct or indirect.

Hoping that you will take due notice
of this my formal protest, (a copy of wich will be forwarded
to the American Consuls at Gaboon and Loanda),
and that you will kindly send me an acknowledgement
of his receipt, I remain with the greatest consideration

Most Respctly, 
Your Obedt Servant
D. L. Marsins.

Witness.
Antonio F. Brazao
Walter Dore




