







No 63

US Consulate, Goree-Dakar
May 16th 1887

Mr Peter Strickland
To the Department of State

Subject

Transferral of the West
African Liquor traffic from American
to German hands through the
establishment of a line of steamers
connecting the "Coast" with North
German Ports.



No 63

U.S. Consulate, Goree-Dakar
May 16th 1887

To the Honorable
James D Porter
Assistant Secretary of State

Sir

Formerly Americans had quite a monopoly
in the African liquor traffic, and not longer than
six years ago New England Rum &amp; Alcohol arrived
at Goree sometimes in quantities of a thousand
barrels at a shipment. The Germans by establishing
a line of steamers to this coast from Hamburgh
have now got nearly all of this trade, and are
besides introducing rapidly other cheap articles
of German manufacture.

The Germans began business here by sending
one steamer per month which at first did not
attract much attention. Now they have eight
new ones, averaging perhaps 1600 tons each,
some one of which is very often seen in our
harbor.

These steamers always come loaded deeply,
and lighten here by discharging, usually about 
four feet. They then proceed to maneuver



and other ports south of it. More and 
more they seem to be gaining on the English
and other competitors, on account of pressure of
the extreme cheapness of their Goods and their
willingness to accommodate customs.

Hamburgh Alcohol, made according to current
reports from rotten potatoes, damaged grain, and 
other vile ingredients, is afforded here I believe at
about 32 cts per gallon, and forms the basis of
most of the sparkling beverages with which the
simon-pure African lodes to regale himself.

It is not now possible for me to give
the amount of liquors imported here from
Germany, as the Custom House Officials seem very
jealous about giving this kind of information.
It is surprising however to see the enormous
quantities of rum, gin &amp; alcohol, which block up
the wharves when a steamer comes in. One can
scarcely conceive where so much vile stuff
goes to, but the capacity of the unrectified
African to absorb into his nature
this kind of rectified spirit is
something phenomenal. I am Sir
Very truly yours
Peter Strickland, US Consul




