







Recd 9th April

Legation of the Republic of Liberia,
Yonkers, N.Y.

April 7, 1866

Sir

I have the honor to acknowledge
receipt of your letters of 26th ult. and of
5th instant, the latter recognizing Mr. Wm
Coppinger as Secty of this Legation.

I beg to inform you that I have received
from the Liberian government a special Commission, with full powers to negotiate with
the government of the United States for
the purchase of a steam gun boat of not 
over 150 tons. One of not over 120 tons
with one eighteen pound pivot gun would
be most suitable.

The govt. of Liberia is particularly
anxious to have such a vessel for other
reasons besides the suppression of the slave
trade, having, (since the disability of the
schooner Quail, their only gun vessel) suffered



for many months great inconvenience in the
collection of revenue and the enforcement of
order among the tribes on different parts of
their coast, and much annoyance growing
out of difficulties between foreigners and
the natives within their jurisdiction which
they would have been saved from had
not the Quail been disabled.

Liberia having been colonized almost
exclusively by persons without capital, and
(unlike any country newly settled by whites
not having the benefit of foreign capital flowing
into it (for their race in other countries, with
few exceptions, have but little) is compelled 
to much economy and yet its great 
need of a vessel, renders the government
of Liberia willing to incur a debt for it

The Government of Liberia is
conscious that pecuniary considerations all
could not move the government of the
United States to transfer a gun boat
and yet the bill, as it has passed the



Senate, seems to me to restrict and limit the
discretion of the Executive Department, so that 
no other consideration can be admitted in 
arranging for the transfer.

It would be happy for Liberia and more 
in accordance with her pecuniary resources,
if the bill would be modified so as to allow 
other considerations to be admitted in fixing the 
cost; for instance, the convenience she would
afford to the United States government in providing
more frequent communications with
any fleet or vessels on her coast s she
would be kept in as frequent intercourse as
possible with all parts of it, and as the
Liberians (as President Warner in a late
letter says) "are in feelings, sentiment and
disposition, America.

The United States being engaged with
Great Britain in the suppression of the
slave trade, could effect much with such
a boat in the hands of the Liberian Government
without the expense of keeping her in



commission, an expense probably annually
equal to her value, possibly England was
induced by some such considerations in addition
to generosity in the gift of the Quail.

I have the honor to be with the
highest consideration. Sir
Your most obedient servant,
H. M. Schieffelin

Honble Wm H. Seward
Secretary of State
Washington D.C.




