









Zion's Mission.

By Mrs. Bishop C. C. Pettey.





In proportion to the growth of the Nation and development 
of our race, from time to time, our Zion must enlarge
her borders, in order to retain her position as a factor in
moulding American sentiment. Our great ship of church
must move with the tide of the times or be over-shadowed 
by more formidable and aggressive denominations.

The value of anything is determined by comparison, 
and so will our Zion be measured as an insignificant or potent 
factor proportionately as she enlarges her borders and
develops her institutions commensurate with the rapid
growth of America and her religious denominations.

The church that does not affect the ship of state, does
not very largely affect the people, and can have no influence
in checking the tide of national evils, which ought to be the
paramount aim of every christian organization; and more
especially every church of our race, in this age of prejudicial
oppression, for it has been almost exclusively through the
arm of the church, that the Afro-American has touched the
pulse of the nation.

Zion should not delay in extending her borders, erecting
her parapets and in fortifying her bulwarks, for her mission 
is not simply that of Sunday service; but she is called
to battle with American sentiment in the interest of the race.
The development of the race does not lessen the demand of
the church but rather increases it; for as a race develops in
religious ethics and the science of civil government, the
more it will agitate and press its rights, the more it will be
opposed and the greater will be its responsibilities. If the
church is to meet all these demands, it must widen and enlarge 
its proportions.

This need of extending the borders of Zion is not confined
to any particular section of the country, but from Nova Scotia 



to Vancouver and from Niagara to the Gulf of Mexico
there is room for improvement.

We approximate as a race to-day, in this country, ten
million souls—and Zion ought to control at least one fourth
of that number. Have we lost the spirit of our fathers and
early pioneers, who plodded the snow of the northern mountains, 
and waded the swamps of the south in darker days to
make our church a possibility? Shall we not contend for
the faith and spirit of our sainted heroes and heroines?
They have bequeathed to us more than a half million members
and churches to correspond; and we in turn should hand
down to our posterity a million members and ten thousand
churches from the neglected states and territories within the
next decade.

It can be done if the machinery of the church is properly 
set in order and well manned.

Our Board of Missions would do well to concentrate its
forces in rearing temples in Chicago, New Orleans, Galveston, 
Los Angeles and Vicksburg. A few fine churches thus
established would soon tell upon public sentiment by turning
the tide towards Zion. We insist upon this plan of missionary
operation.

The Catholics do not spend their money mincing around
rural missions—but they capture the towns and cities and thus
operate from great centers; and in a few short years, they have
transmitted their teachings and religious faith throughout the
entire section. In this same way we should capture the West.

We cannot do all at once; but what we do should be done
in a way that it will be effectual for lasting and permanent
good. Thus will we build monuments that coming ages
cannot efface. Home mission work with us deserves preeminence 
over that of Africa, or the isles of the sea because
of the uncrystalized condition of the religious sentiment of
the race.

Millions are yet unconverted and have no particular church
proclivity. Thousands along the lagoons of Mississippi, the
bayous of Louisiana and the brazos of Texas spend their
Sabbaths horse racing and gambling. Many more in middle
and western Texas consider the daring exploits of the cowboys, 
the most heroic examples of manhood.



Now is our best opportunity to house these millions at
home. Zion "lift up your eyes and behold the fields for
they are white now ready to harvest." A century ago there
was not a well organized Negro christian province in the
world; but to-day the black world is lifting up its head, shaking 
off the lethargy of the long night of darkness and foiling 
the powers of oppression.

This is a marvelous age- an age of reforms and revolutions. 
There is not a prominent government on the globe
to-day, but that in some way is being touched by the hand
of the Negro, and the beating pulse of the race is felt in the
finger tips of civilization.

England has her Transvall, the United States her amalgamated
South, Italy her Abyssinia; France, Germany and
Russia are equally interested in African territory, while
Spain is exhausting her resources to maintain her sovereignty 
in Cuba against the Insurgents. What means the victories 
of King Menelek of Abyssinia, King Kruger of the
Transvaal and the triumphs of Maceo and Gomez, but the
uprising of an oppressed race daring to assert manhood; and
from Abyssinia to Cuba the plaintive waves of the ocean
bear tidings of Negro victories. It is not strange that all of
these have seemingly risen at once? And is it not stranger
still that they are scoring similar victories with superior
arms against them; triumphantly opposing earth's greatest
nations, lifting up the standard of freedom and self protection
against tyranny? May we not say that it is Ethiopia
stretching forth her hand; and that God is raising up a long
forgotten race.

In this same century, too, the governments of Liberia
and Hayti have been established—and the slaves of North and
South America emancipated. It does appear to me that
this is the Negro's age of new life. The smouldering fires
of manhood and liberty, which have been smothered for a
thousand years are bursting forth like volcanic flames, upheaving
mountains of oppression. Let us hope that our ancient 
glory is soon to be restored; and from the Delta of the
Nile to the Golden Gate of the West let freedom prevail and
Zion exult in the triumph of her glory.

Newbern, N. C.





