







Rec 27 July
" 13 October
No 9.

United States Commercial Agency
Loanda May 23 1860.

Sir.

Herewith I enclose Returns from
this Commercial Agency for the Quarter ending
March 31, 1860. The several accounts &amp; certificates
I have directed to the Treasury Department
&amp; have drawn on the Hon Secretary of Treasury
for $227.11¢ being balance of my Salary for that
Quarter.

I last had the honor of addressing you
under date of January 24 enclosing Returns
for the Quarter ending December 31, 1859 at
which time I requested leave of absence to take
effect as soon as practicable after the receipt of your
answer, which I trust has been granted.

For three months past there has been considerable
trouble at Ambriz &amp; Kisembo caused by the receipt
of a Letter at Ambriz sent by HBM Commissioner
of this place, but said to have been written by the
Brazilian Consul of this Port, said Letter being
directed to His Royal Highness Don Nicolau,
Prince of Congo &amp;c &amp;c. said Nicolau a Black
being at the time employed by the Portuguese 
Govern--ment


Hon Lewis Cass
Secretary of State.




-ment at Ambriz in some moderate capacity. 

The Letter informed "Nicolau" that the Governor-General 
of this Province intended to imprison him
for writing to the Libson Journals in respect to his
Government, &amp; advising him to leave immediately for
Kisembo. On his arrival at Kisembo he entered
an English house &amp; soon afterwards the Natives collected
&amp; demanded him. After considerable delay
Don Nicolau was given up &amp; immediately shot &amp; beheaded
by the Natives.

As there is an American House at Kisembo
owned by Messrs Brookhouse &amp; Co. of Salem Mass. I
at once on hearing the proceedings of the Natives requested
Capt Colhoun of the USS "Portsmouth" to
go there, to which request he immediately complied.
On his arrival at Kisembo &amp; during his stay there of
two or three days, everything was quiet.  Some days
afterwards the Gov. Genl of this Province went with
a force of 300 to 400 men to Ambriz &amp; Kisembo.
At the latter place they burnt the native town &amp; then
returned to Loanda.  While the Portguese Troops
were at Kisembo, Capt Brent of the USS "Marion",
together with Capt Fitzroy of the HBMS "Falcon" were
on Shore with a number of their men. On the arrival
of the Gov Genl with his Troops requesting permission
to enter the Houses for Refreshment &amp; Rest. he was



Refused, as it was the opinion of the Residents there,
that if the Portuguese entered, their Lives &amp; Property
would not be so secure after the Portuguese
Americans &amp; English left, as they would if they were
not allowed to enter. Since then the Natives
have made two unsuccessful attacks on Ambriz.
Trade continues to be brought in by the Natives to
Kisembo &amp; it is now quiet there.

About the 1st of April some Portuguese Soldiers
were coming from the Copper Mines to Ambriz &amp; 
when within 15 miles of the latter place they were
attacked by a large number of Natives &amp; obliged to
retreat. in doing so they jumped into the River
"Loge" in order to cross to the other side. Their
loss was near 100, including one Lady, the Wife of 
the officer in command of the Party.

The Roads between Ambriz &amp; the Mines
are filled with Natives &amp; the Portguese have
collected a force of about 1000 men to march
into the Interior. They left Ambriz on the 21st
to punish the Natives &amp; also open the roads to
the Mines. This force is commanded by the
best of the Portuguese officers attached to this Province,
&amp; it is thought will be sufficient to drive
the Natives from the vicinity.

This interference of HBM Commissioner



&amp; the Brazilian Consul General, has been the source
of great anxiety to the Government of this Province,
&amp; causing great expense. It will probably result
in the Portuguese Government requesting the withdrawal
of the above mentioned parties from their
official functions.

Very Respectfully
Your Obt Servt
John G. Willis
US Coml Agent.



