







No 35 13

United States Consulate
St Paul de Loanda
Sept 30th, 1882.

Hon. J.C. Bancraft Davis
Asst. Secty of State
Washington D.C.


Sir,

I have the honor most respectfully to state that
Capt of Frigate, Ferreira do Amaral (Francisco
Joaquim) has been appointed governor general
of Angola and arrived here by the last mail 
steamer from Lisbon, he is accompanied by his 
wife, and the aid de camp.

Governor Amaral is, as I must judge by his 
friendly reception of me and by the good wishes
he has toward Americans, determined to help
the American traders and commerce on this 
coast. A railroad is much needed, and a 
free grant of land for 99 years can be 
obtained by any American company willing
to invest some capital; The Country is very 
rich but has no developments, In all the 
reports I am now collecting, and my own 
personal judgement which will be forwarded
to the State Department for my quarter
ending December 1882. You will be able 
to see what a R.R. Company here



would be able to realize in 10 years; a 
great profit would consequently be the 
result and new spirit put in this wealth 
but forgotten country

Governor Amaral while talking to me
about Americans, its commerce, trade,
goods &amp;a. mentioned that it was strange
that a nation so well knon would still
keep whole squadrons in countries and
ports where there was no need of such;
and that in his belief an Am: Man of 
War was needed at least twice a year 
on this coast. his Excellency's Idea on this
matter is supported by every one I know,
and in my conversation with several
natives chief and trades on this coast
I have been told the following

"You call yourself a representative of a great
country were all kinds of goods aboard,
but where are they? You say that your
nation is greater and larger then
Holland, France, England how can
you prove it to us; The English have 
plenty men of war along this coast,
Dutch, French and English goods are 
daily coming by the English mail
and other merchant vessels. On the



coast you see nothing but English Trading 
Houses, and the goods we are now wearing
are English; Why then if your country is so
Big as you mention and has so much fine
goods gun powder &amp;a &amp;a that you do not
bring some to us to see, and trade: Why 
do you not put in our country American
trading houses; protect them, and he found
to them, and if you have such great
ships as England has  big guns;
Why not let us see them".

I have the honor to be
Sir
Your obedient servant
L de R du Verge
US Consul



