









The African Question





Most of our exchanges are discussing the African question. That
continent is rapidly becoming better known to the American people
than ever before. The New York Herald still heads the list in furnishing 
news of explorations and exhaustive articles upon the subject.
The religious press of all denominations has also much to say, especially 
on the moral aspect of the present and future of that land.
Bishop Haven and his traveling companion, Rev. J. T. Gracey, are
filling our church papers with glowing accounts of the fruitfulness and
beauty of Africa.

The colored people are not listless spectators of these movements
in behalf of that country. At the session of the South Carolina Conference, 
in January last, Rev. J. B. Middleton made a deep impression 
by a lecture on the future of this race, making some plain statements
in regard to the past, and holding out but little encouragement for that
people in this country, and calling attention to the African question
as the possible solution of the problem of the colored man's future.



Some prominent ministers of the A. M. E. Church have taken decided 
ground in favor of a general movement to colonize Africa, and
gain a denominational foothold there. Probably they do not expect 
to remove that people from this country, but hope to prevail on
enough persons to emigrate there to greatly strengthen the settlements
on the Western Coast. This is, beyond question, a very desirable
end to accomplish; nor do we see any serious difficulty in the way of
such a movement. Comparatively little assistance will be needed to
effect important results in this direction. Free transportation and six
months' support after reaching Africa would cover most of the expense 
necessarily incurred.

England indicates more interest in this matter than our Government.
That has shipping. We have corn and meat. If the steamship
Great Eastern were to stop at Port Royal and offer free passage to
Africa, with rations for six months, we do not doubt that it would be
as easily and completely filled as was Noah's Ark, by volunteers for
that land. Probably that could transport ten thousand persons at a
trip; and, notwithstanding the resistance of some to such a measure,
the readiness of others to go might keep, at least, that boat busy for
twenty years, and if treaties of peace were formed with native tribes, in
favorable and healthy locations, under the protection of the United
States and England, half a million of Americans could be placed on
those shores, with a hopeful future in prospect.

America was settled by colonization. In some movement of the
kind, if not just that way, all countries are opened; though our land 
affords the best illustration of the happy fruits of colonization in all
history. Among the thirteen colonies, not one has a better early record 
than Georgia. This State was planted by a broad, practical,
Christian philanthropy in behalf of the poor and ignorant. It was
the most liberal, the most free, the most pre-eminently charitable—it is
not too much to say Christian—of all the colonies, in its early history.
There is no reason why similar colonies should not be planted within
a quarter of a century on the shores of Africa.

The greatest embarrassment that we see in such an enterprise is the
condition of the people. They are just out of bondage, and are
merely beginning to receive intellectual training. Twenty-five years
from now they will probably have so far advanced as to become much
more self-reliant, active, and intelligent—better qualified for the subjugation 
of Africa to Christian civilization than they are now; but at
this time, if the more enterprising among them, especially those who
are beginning to feel restless and discontented here, should lead in that
direction, desirable companies could be formed of promising material.
Those who are willing to remain in harmony with the whites, should
not think of going elsewhere till well assured of being able to better
their condition; nor must it be forgotten that the Government has
neither the power nor disposition to remove this race by force.
If any emigrate to Africa, they will do so voluntarily; but that thousands 



will go, if offered a favorable opportunity, there is no doubt.
If the movement is of man only, it will come to naught; but if
it is of God, great results may be expected.—Methodist Advocate,
Atlanta, Ga.





