









From the Charleston S. C. Recorder.

Memorial from the Descendants of Africa.





The following petition is intended only for those who are desirous 
to better their condition by leaving the United States for
Africa, where they can build up a National character for themselves,
by establishing a powerful government and a great commercial centre 
for the race, and thus rise to an independence and glory that can
never be reached in this country, say what you will or may:

To the Senate and House of Representatives in Congress assembled:

The petition of the undersigned, descendants of Africa and
citizens of — — respectfully represents:

First. That, we find ourselves, through no fault of ours, in a condition 
which to us is growing more and more intolerable every day.
We are shut out from all prospect of growth and proper development 
in this country. We consider that it would be for the interest
and welfare of both races—the white and the black—if an opening
were afforded by the United States Government to as many of the
Negro population as desire it, to return to the land of their fathers.
We believe that there are hundreds of thousands out of the seven
millions who sigh for relief and would gladly avail themselves of the
provisions of the measure recently proposed in the United States
Senate to appropriate a certain amount of money for this purpose.
We hail the proposition as suggesting the most important measure 
of the present century for the regeneration and elevation of Africa 
and her descendants.

Second. It appears to your petitioners that the time has come
when the United States should turn their attention to the valuable
trade which may be developed between this country and Africa.
The demand for American goods, we are informed, is increasing in
various parts of Africa, and new and permanent markets for the
products of the United States may be opened by transferring American
Negroes, whose energies are hampered here, to that new and
extensive field-their own original and congenial home. It is estimated 
that the share which England alone has in the commerce of
Africa amounts to one hundred and twenty-five millions of dollars
($125,000,000) annually; while the yearly value of the trade of the
United States with that Continent is small and insignificant.

Third. Your petitioners, therefore, respectfully and earnestly
ask Congress, in order to relieve the condition of the Negro population
in this country, and to create outlets for the increasing manufactures 
of the United States, to assist as many Negroes as desire to
go to Africa, in the following manner:



1st. By providing free transportation, either to Liberia, where
American Negroes have already gained a foothold and have made
a successful beginning of an independent nation, and where reside
the friends and relatives of many in this country, or, if suitable arrangements 
can be made with the authorities—to the Congo Free
State, or to both, since Africa needs her civilized descendants in various 
parts of her vast domain.

2nd. By conducting their emigration and settlement, according
to the following scheme:

Every adult emigrant, having a family, to receive on arriving in
Africa, one hundred acres of land and a dwelling house. Adult emigrants, 
male or female, having no family, each fifty acres of land
and a dwelling house. Provisions for at least one year to be
furnished to each single individual and to each head of a family
according to the number composing the family. Provisions to be
issued monthly from a depot conveniently established for that purpose 
by an agent appointed by the Government.

The sum of two hundred dollars in cash to be given to each
head of a family on the eve of embarkation and one hundred dollars
on his arrival in Africa, and to each single individual, male or female,
the sum of one hundred dollars on his or her leaving the country
and fifty dollars on arrival in Africa.

Farming and mechanical implements and tools to be furnished
each family. In each settlement formed, one or two schools to be
established and supplied with competent male and female teachers
according to the number of the inhabitants, and with an experienced
and skilful physician having charge of a dispensary furnished by the
United States.

A competent Negro superintendent to be placed over each company 
of emigrants-no company to exceed one thousand persons.
Each superintendent to receive a salary of — — dollars a year to
be paid in quarterly installments.

Two Negro commissioners of emigration to be appointed in
each Southern State, whose duty it shall be to receive applications
for passage to Africa, and to examine into the character and fitness of
applicants and report to the Bureau of Emigration which shall be established 
for the purpose.

In cases where proper persons, having real property, houses or
lands, desire to emigrate, appraisement to be made of the value
of the said houses and lands, and the Government to pay the owners
for them, in addition to the grants above mentioned.

The commissioners of emigration to forward intending emigrants 
to the ports of embarkation viz; Baltimore, Norfolk, Charleston,



Pensacola, New Orleans, Mobile, and Galveston. The salary of
each commissioner to be — — dollars per annum.

No emigrants to be sent out until the expiration of one year after
the enactment of the law. In the meantime, the United States Government 
to enter into negotiation with the Liberian Government
and the Government of the Congo Free State for the purchase of
lands and the location of emigrants. Surveyors and mechanics to
be sent out to lay out settlements and construct houses for emigants.

Two steamers to be provided of sufficient capacity to accommodate 
one thousand passengers each, with their luggage. For the first
five years each of the said steamers to be dispatched with emigrants
from any one of the ports above mentioned or from all twice a year,
in the months of April and November, one to Liberia and the other
to the Congo.

Each settlement to be furnished with an arsenal and arms and
ammunition by the United States Government for defence and protection.

Fourth. It is not the desire of your petitioners to become paupers 
on the bounty of the United States Goverment. They ask only
or such aid and facilities as they believe would give them a fair
start in the land of their fathers, that they may promote not only its
civilization and Christianization but develop its latent agricultural,
mineral and commercial resources and make returns to the United
States, in the course of time, in the commerce they will open up between
the two countries and the increasing market they will furnish
for American manufactures, and also in the moral and spiritual result 
which shall accrue to humanity from the regeneration of the
Continent, as well as the relief which will be afforded to the United
States from the growing friction between the two races which is so
menacing to the peace, comfort and prosperity of both.





