







Department of State Received Apr 2 1888
No. 28.

United States Consulate,
St. Paul de Loanda,
February 2d, 1888.

Mr. Downing
To the Department of State.

Subject:

Portuguese occupation of Ambrizette

Abstract of contents:

Reporting armed expedition taking possession
of Ambrizette, &amp;c



No. 28.

United States Consulate,
St. Paul de Loanda,
February 2d, 1888.

Hon. G. L. Rives,
Assistant Secretary of State.
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have the honor to inform
the Department, that an expedition of
land and sea forces under the command
of Señor João Antonio de Brissac das 
Neves Ferreira Captain of the Frigate Gov.
of Congo; have taken military occupation
in the name of the King of Portugal
of a tract of land north of Loanda
and Ambriz, in the neighborhood of
parallel 7º S, and known as Ambrizette.

'Tho the strong natural
limit of Angola i.e., as regards climate
fauna and ethnology is from the Congo
River to Cape , yet the country occupied
by the Portuguese, until this later addition,
was only from Ambriz to Mossamedes.

The



The natives inhabiting this
part of the coast are called ""
The natural effect of the slave trade was
to encourage them into indolence but
since all hope of it being again established 
has passed away, the development of
produce in this district and from the
interior has been great, and premises
to become much of greater and very important
in amount.

At present most of the 
produce comes from the interior. The system
of trade differs from that of other points
and is complicated and curious. All 
produce-except ivory are being brought
to the trader is weighed and price
agued in English "longs" in Portuguese
"pecas". This "peca" or "long" is the unit
of exchange to which all articles of
barter are refused: for instance, 3000
blue glass beads; 6 yds. common cotton
cloth: &amp;c. are equal to a "long" or "peca",
articles of greater value are more longs
each.

Being  to allow
the



the natives to enter the factories, the buyer
gives the seller a paper with the number of "longs"
or "pecas" written on it, which the holder
presents at a window of the store when he receives
its value in goods. It can be imagined what
shouting and noise there must be when hundreds
are gathered before one under each clamoring
to be paid first, but practice has enabled
the trader to become so expert in the handling of
these people that the chattering crowds seem
to melt away as by enchantment

The principal products are coffee,
pea nuts, fibre, sesumum seed, red gum copal
white angola gum, india rubber, palm kernals,
palm oil and ivory.

Several menial deposits
of more or less value, are known the
most important are, one of mineral pitch
and another of Malachite, but the natives,
through fear of annexation, have made 
these deposits "fetish," and as they are
reached via the beautiful Ambrizette
river, unfortunately navigable only by
canoes, the natives allow no white men
to go further towards its source than
a



a few miles.

This expression of the policy of
the Portuguese is in accord with their many
efforts to promote the interests of the province,
giving them an added influence in the 
Congo and making Angola more interesting
to the commercial world.

The reports of the officer who
commanded in this expedition has not yet
been published but through the kindness
of the Governor General I have been able
to see the original of which the enclosed
is a translation.

I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Henry F. Downing
U.S. Consul

List of Inclosures

No 1. Translation of report of Commanding
officer. Expedition for occupation of
Ambrizette



Translation

The most Illustrious and Excellent Sir:

I have the honor to announce to your
Excellency, that in obedience to orders, I arrived
at this place on the 22d of the current month,
between the hours of 10 and 11 in the morning
and after seeing that the forces had their mid-day
meal. all other things being in readiness, I
gave the necessary order to disembark which operation
commenced at 1 o'clock.

Knowing the harbor because of former visits,
I allowed the Bark "Cabinda" to near the shore, while,
the Steamer "" was 400.00 from the beach.
The Steamer "Massabe", having been ordered to 
follow in sailing order in the rear, did not
arrive until later when during the calm hours 
of night, she took the "Cabinda" in tow and moved
her seven miles to the point of disembaration.

Disembarking my forces, I sent in the
first boat the Resident with some workmen and
native servants with instructions to care for boats
as they arrived: Having done this I next sent ashore
by squadrons the 1st platoon of a Company of
infantry, giving ashore myself I caused the
troops to occupy, at quick step, a commanding
position on an elevation to the south of a village,
which rested on the edge of a swamp, and to
the rear of the English factory of Hatton &amp; Cookson.

The other platoon of infantry having landed
by squadrons, the artillery supplied with one 
section of camp equipments and baggage.
Thus disembarkation was compelled during the
night



night and happily without loss, for in order to
prevent accidents I detailed a few sailors as a 
rescue corps and to assist in landing. Simultaneously
with the disembarking I directed the cantonment
of the troops and the posting of the necessary 
sentries for the night.

The following morning I planted a mast
brought from "Cabinda" for the purpose, then amidst
the sounds of trumpets; the beating of drums; the
military salutes of the of the infantry, the national salute
from the artillery and from the vessels of the fleet
in a holiday array of flags, I raised and
gave to the breeze the national emblem of our country,
and declared, in the presence of "Bocca de Rei" and
other native princes summoned by me to be present,
that I took possession of the country in the name
of Portugal's King; but that our intentions were
amicable and meant no wrong to them yet
a continuation of this kindness depended upon 
the future actions. Attempting to remonstrate,
they said that our flag could not be displayed
without the permission of their monarch for
reply, I told them, that I did not summon
them for the purpose of asking permission from
their King, but as witness to my act, and
that it mattered not whether permission was
given or not. These natives before taking their
departure mentioned a time for returning where
at a conference they would advise me as to
their King's decision. On the 26th they returned
and informed me that their King had decided
to accept what he could not prevent .

No disturbance has been caused business
having been carried on as usual at the factories
so that, I can report, without answering for
the



the future, that now Ambrizette is occupied and
that the Portuguese flag is flying over the land.

God save your Excellency.

Military Quarters at Ambrizette
28th January, 1888

(Sgn'd), João Antonio de Brissac das Neves Ferreira,
Captain of Frigate and Governor of the Congo

To his Excellency,
the Governor General
of the Province of Angola.




