









The Pan-African Congress





This article is compiled from reports and bulletins on the Pan-African Congress sent
by W. E. Burghardt Du Bois

The Pan-African Congress is an established fact. It was held February 19, 20, 21,
1919, at the Grand Hôtel, Boulevard des Capucines, Paris. The Executive Committee
consisted of M. Blaise Diagne, President; Dr. W. E. Burghardt DuBois, Secretary; Mrs.
Ida Gibbs Hunt, Assistant Secretary, and M. E. F. Fredericks. The Congress maintained
an office at the Hôtel de Malte, 63 Rue Richelieu, with office hours from 10 A. M.
to 6 P. M.

Fifty-seven delegates, including a number of native Africans educated abroad, were
present at the Congress. In all, fifteen countries were represented, as follows:



United States of America
16


French West Indies
13


Haiti
7


France
7


Liberia
3


Spanish Colonies
2


Portuguese Colonies
1


San Domingo
1


England
1


British Africa
1


French Africa
1


Algeria
1


Egypt
1


Belgian Congo
1


Abyssinia
1


Total
57



France was represented by the Chairman of the Committee of Foreign Affairs of the
French Chamber; Belgium, by M. Van Overgergh, of the Belgian Peace Commission; Portugal,
by M. Freire d' Andrade, former Minister of Foreign Affairs. William English Walling
and Charles Edward Russell were in attendance from the United States of America.

At the first meeting held Wednesday afternoon, February 19, M. Diagne, Deputy from
Senegal to the French Chamber, opened the Congress with words of praise for French
colonial rule. He expressed the hope that the ideal of racial unity would inspire
all of African descent throughout the entire world.

Many interesting speeches followed, all of which struck a characteristic note. M.
Candace, Deputy from Guadeloupe, insisted with much eloquence and frankness that color
should not be considered in the maintenance of human rights. That the rights of black
Americans met with so little respect in the United States was, he declared, a matter
for special deprecation.

Two other deputies from the French West Indies, M. Boisneuf and M. Lagrosillière,
spoke with equal eloquence and expressed their inability to understand how Americans
could fail to treat as equals those who in common with themselves were giving their
lives for democracy and justice.

Mr. King, delegate from Liberia to the Peace Conference, gave an interesting exposition
of Liberia's aims and accomplishments and expressed the hope that people of African
descent everywhere would take pride in that little independent black Republic and
in every way possible aid in her future development. "Let us," he concluded, "be considered
a home for the darker races in Africa. It is your duty to help. We are asking for
rights, but let us not, therefore, forget our duties, for remember wherever there
are rights, there are also duties and responsibilities."

The Chairman of Foreign Affairs for France emphasized the fact that the sentiment
of France on equality and liberty, irrespective of color, was shown by the fact that
she had six colored representatives in the French Chamber, one of whom was the distinguished
Chairman of the Congress, M. Diagne, who served on his Committee. Even before the
Revolution France had pursued the same policy.

M. Overgergh spoke of the reforms in the Belgian colony and of an International Geographical
Society which he represented.

M. d' Andrade talked of the opportunities and liberties given the natives in the Portuguese
colonies.

William English Walling said that while he had to blush when America was being arraigned,
he felt that changes were already going on in the United States and that in time Americans,
whether willingly or not, would have to submit to the opinion of the world and accord
to her colored contingent full justice and equality. She must



yield or go down before the darker races of the world. If France has six colored representatives
in Parliament, he said, the United States of America, considering her black population,
should have at least ten colored representatives in her legislative body.

Charles Edward Russell's address stirred and inspired all. He said the old notion
that one race is inferior to another is false, and this war has helped to kill that
idea. This Congress, he felt, was a splendid step forward. Africa should press her
claims here and now. "It is a great opportunity and yours is the duty to fulfill it,"
he said. "It is a duty for Africa and for world democracy, for black and white alike.
Insist upon your rights!"

At the second session, Mr. Archer, ex-Mayor of Battersea, London, England, spoke of
the importance of demanding one's rights, of the value of unity of purpose and effort
in ameliorating the condition of people of color throughout the world, starting with
the United States of England. He said that while England accords many rights to her
citizens of color, she does not give them as much representation as France. "We must
fight for our just rights at all times," he concluded.

Dr. George Jackson, an American, spoke of his experiences in the Belgian Congo, and
explained why the natives had come to hate German Kultur. As a colored American he
also had often had cause to blush for America.

Mrs. A. W. Hunton, from the United States of America, spoke of the importance of women
in the world's reconstruction and regeneration of today, and of the necessity of seeking
their co-operation and counsel.

At the afternoon session of the last day Mme. Jules Siefried, President of the French
National Association for the Rights of Women, brought words of encouragement from
the International Council, then meeting in Paris. She said that no one could appreciate
better than women the struggle for broader rights and liberties.

Resolutions were passed providing for another Congress to be held in Paris during
the year 1921.

The following resolutions, to be presented to the Peace Conference now in session,
were unanimously adopted:

I. The Negroes of the world in Pan-African Congress assembled demand in the interests
of justice and humanity, for the purpose of strengthening the forces of Civilization,
that immediate steps be taken to develop the 200,000,000 of Negroes and Negroids;
to this end, they propose:

1. That the Allied and Associated Powers establish a Code of Laws for the international
protection of the Natives of Africa similar to the proposed international Code for
Labor.

2. That the League of Nations establish a permanent Bureau charged with the special
duty of overseeing the application of these laws to the political, social and economic
welfare of the Natives.

II. The Negroes of the world demand that hereafter the Natives of Africa and the Peoples
of African descent be governed according to the following principles:

1.—The Land: The land and its natural resources shall be held in trust for the Natives
and at all times they shall have effective ownership of as much land as they can profitably
develop.

2.—Capital: The investment of capital and granting of concessions shall be so regulated
as to prevent the exploitation of Natives and the exhaustion of the natural wealth
of the country. Concessions shall always be limited in time and subject to State control.
The growing social needs of the Natives must be regarded and the profits taxed for
the social and material benefit of the Natives.

3.—Labor: Slavery, forced labor and corporal punishment, except in punishment of crime,
shall be abolished; and the general conditions of labor shall be prescribed and regulated
by the State.

4.—Education: It shall be the right of every Native child to learn to read and write
his own language and the language of the trustee nation, at public expense, and to
be given technical instruction in some branch of industry. The State shall also educate
as large a number of Natives as possible in higher technical and cultural training
and maintain a corps of Native teachers.

5.—Medicine and Hygiene: It shall be recognized that human existence in the tropics
calls for special safeguards and a scientific system of public hygiene. The State
shall be responsible for medical care and sanitary conditions without discouraging
collective and individual initiative. A service



created by the State shall provide physicians and hospitals, and shall enforce rules.
The State shall establish a native medical staff.

6.—The State: The Natives of Africa must have the right to participate in the government
as fast as their development permits in conformity with the principle that the government
exists for the Natives and not the Natives for the government. The Natives shall have
voice in the government to the extent that their development permits, beginning at
once with local and tribal government according to ancient usage, and extending gradually
as education and experience proceeds, to the higher offices of State, to the end that,
in time, Africa be ruled by consent of the Africans.

7.—Culture and Religion: No particular religion shall be imposed and no particular
form of human culture. There shall be liberty of conscience. The uplift of the Natives
shall take into consideration their present condition and shall allow the utmost scope
to racial genius, social inheritance and individual bent, so long as these are not
contrary to the best established principles of civilization.

8.—Civilized Negroes: Wherever persons of African descent are civilized and able to
meet the tests of surrounding culture, they shall be accorded the same rights as their
fellow-citizens; they shall not be denied on account of race or color a voice in their
own government, justice before the courts, and economic and social equality according
to ability and desert.

9.—The League of Nations: Greater security of life and property shall be guaranteed
the Natives; international labor legislation shall cover Native workers as well as
whites; they shall have equitable representation in all the international institutions
of the League of Nations, and the participation of the blacks themselves in every
domain of endeavor shall be encouraged in accordance with the declared object of Article
19 of the League of Nations, to wit: "The well being and the development of these
people constitute a sacred mission of civilization and it is proper in establishing
the League of Nations to incorporate therein pledges for the accomplishment of this
mission."

Whenever it is proven that African Natives are not receiving just treatment at the
hands of any State or that any State deliberately excludes its civilized citizens
or subjects of Negro descent from its body politic and cultural, it shall be the duty
of the League of Nations to bring the matter to the attention of the civilized world.

Blaise Diagne, President.
W. E. B. Du Bois, Secretary.





