







No. 72

Consulate of the United States
Zanzibar, April 9, 1889

Honorable G. L. Rives
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have the honor to call
the attention of the Department
to the case of Dr. B. F. Wilson
of Johanna. My
despatch number 25 of the
10th November 1887 gave
full particulars of this case.

I am enclosing herewith
three communications lately
received from Dr. Wilson
which give a pretty good
idea of the struggle he is
having to keep his head
above water. His case
is a desperate one and
I am certain that he is
practically bankrupt

There is no doubt
but



but for the Sultan's 
unwarranted interference. That
he would now be not only
solvent but perfectly independent.

Dr. Wilson calls my attention 
to two clerical errors in
the dispatch of the Secretary
of State number 320 to Mr
McLane. Page 1 fifth
line from bottom should read
1872 instead of 1878. Page
2 of same dispatch should 
read (in fifteenth line)
1884, instead of 1882.

I also observe on the same
page, ninth line from the 
bottom, that the word "wife"
should read "life".

I trust that something 
may be done for Dr
Wilson and that speedily
since it is not probable
that he can long continue
in procession of the Estate,
Encumbered



encumbered as it is at
the present time

I have the honor to be
Sir
Your obedient servant
Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul.

Enclosures:

No. 1. Dr. Wilson to Mr. Govea
July 24 1888. with copies of
letters to Gov. of Mayotte 
May 29th &amp; June 13th 1888 &amp;
to Fr. Resident of June 27/88.

2. Dr. Wilson to Mr. Govea
Dec 26 1888 with statement of
Seyed Alli bin Sultan Salim

3. Dr. Wilson to Mr. Govea
Jan 27 1889 with copies of
letters to Fr. Resident of Nov
24th and Dec. 31, 1888







To the Governor of Mayotte on behalf of the
labourers and made a complaint to the Acting
Resident (The Resident Troupel being absent to
Mayotte). The Acting Resident has also reported
the affair to the Governor of Mayotte but no notice
as yet has been taken of the affair and my letters
not even been acknowledged by the post. Last 
month there was a new Governor appointed, to
Mayotte and I had the honor of calling upon
him on the 16th inst. He mentioned having
received my communications and that of
the Acting Resident and spoke of the injustice
of the Sultan's conduct and I suppose it
will end there. No redress to be had.
Whenever I speak of my claims against
the Sultan they invariably say: "Your Government
have taken the matter in hand". I have
to three different Governors offered to show
my claims and documents but they always
decline to look at them. I cannot inquire
why my government does not do something
for me. It is now three years since the
"Quiniata" came here and the Commander
made as thorough examination as was possible
at the time and I am sure his report could
not have been otherwise than favorable to me.
Since then the "Lancaster" &amp; "Alliance" have been here



have been here and gone away without
scarcely maintaining me of my claims
against the Sultan. Captain Potts did make
some attempt to make inquiries about it but
the Governor of Mayotte came in at the time in
a little gunboat to make a treaty with the Sultan
and take over the Protectorate and Captain Potts
dropped everything and went away. The
Sultan has since and his son Salim has
said to me that they never would have made
a treaty with the French placing the island under
French protection if the "Lancaster" had not
been here. I claim to be an honorable,
respectable and patriotic citizen of the United
States and always have been and I think
I have a right to claim protection and
assistance as such and I do not think I
am asking too much when I demand it.
In fact I think I should be recognized
as an outcast if I did not. I always
fly the American flag upon my house and
boat, and when the rebellion of the Sultan's
brother was going on the American flag was
upon my house both day &amp; night and
being fired upon by the same time by the 
Sultans soldiers. I doubt not that
the U.S. Government will take notice of the



time —but when? I have been
financially ruined by this Sultan and
without the slightest just cause. and
unless I get relief soon I should be obliged
to comply with the Sultan's great desire.
Abandon my plantation &amp; property
and leave the island when the Sultan will
step in and get what he has always wanted
and quarreled for.

I am informed by some intimate
friends in the employ of the French Government
that all of the officials at Mayotte are very
much afraid of me. They are afraid that
I will expose them and their so called
protectorate to the U.S. Government. The
Protectorate as felt by all thus far is a 
and the inhabitants are much worse off than
before with such a Resident as we have here
from the island of Mohilla it is much the same.

The Sultan is assisted by the Resident to
carry out his Tyrannical ideas. The Governor
of Mayotte told me he would post a  to 
protection of the Sultan but the Governor 
. There has been three Governors
within two years. They got 
the Sultan and leave. !! 
that you will place my 



before the U.S. Government in its just and
truthful light and that you will try and
see the Sultan's brother Said Allii  still
in Zanzibar and get his sworn testimony
in regard to the French Resident entering
into a contract to rid the island of me for the
sum of $20,000. (This statement the said
said Allii made to me in the presence of a witness
and said he was willing to take oath to the .
The above mentioned sum the Sultan agreed
to pay and the Resident agreed to do the job )

And with best wishes

I am
Your Obt servant
B F Wilson

I enclose herewith copies of my letter to the
Governor of Mayotte which have not received any
attention as yet and there has been  
of writing. Also copy of my letter to the Acting
Resident who I know has written to the Governor
but no reply to his communication as yet.



Patsy Estate
Johanna 29 May 1888

To
His Excellency the Governor of Mayotte
Representant du Protectorat Francais 

Sir,

Upon my return from Mayotte on the 26th inst
I found a large number of my free labourers absent
from the work on this estate. On the following day
they came to me and made their formal complaint
that they left the work because the Sultan Abdallah
obliged them to pay a poll tax of five dollars and one half
each that worked upon this estate but those  working
for me were only made to pay one dollar and one half.

This is apparently aimed at me to deprive
me of my labour as the Sultan has often done
before. I am told the men that I would
write to you upon this subject and without doubt this
wrong would be righted and the most of them have 
gone to work again today awaiting your reply.
Owing to the Resident open hatred to me only
knowing well he wold as nothing in the matter I 
have taken the liberty to address this letter to you
at once.

I have the honor to be
Your Obedient Servant
B.F. Wilson



Patsy Estate
Johanna 13th June 1888

To
His Excellency the Governor of Mayotte
Representant du Protectorate Francais 

Sir

On the 29th ultimo I wrote to your Excellency upon
the subject of my labourers being over taken by the
Sultan. I write to you that only the labourers
upon my estate were taxed five dollars per head. I 
have since learned that those working for Mr Sims
upon Pomony estate are likewise taxed five
dollars. Consequently I hasten to correct the
mistake I made in writing to you that only
mine were as taxed.

There is no doubt however that their own
object is in to deprive us of labour and it is an
extortion. I hear many have been imprisoned
for not being able to pay this enormous tax.

My labourers say unless they can get
relief from the tax they will be obliged to stop
work and pay the one dollar

I am
Your Excellency’s Obedient Servant
B. F. Wilson



Estate
Johanna 27th June 1888

Monsieur
le Cornet
Acting Resident Francais a Johanna

Sir

Yesterday the 26th instant two armed policemen
of the Sultan Abdallah - one by the name of Bakkam
Mossa (alias Trook) - and one by the name of Hashim
Homed came upon this estate they say by the orders of
the Sultan and went to the village of Bazamena and
demanded from each male working upon this estate
the sum of four dollars and in case they did not
or could not pay this sum they were to take them to
and imprison them. The men
replied that they had not the money and could not
pay but if they would let them work and earn money
they would pay. These armed policemen then demanded
one  from each resident in the village for their
trouble and promised to report to the Sultan. These
men not having the money to pay the policemen
they have prevented them from going to their work
today. Hearing that my men did not come
to their work and  the reason I sent
my policemen to bring to me these policemen
sent by the Sultan and  their reason for
committing such disorder upon my estate without
.

I contend that the Sultan has no right to send
his armed policemen upon this estate without my



knowledge! 
of his men to deprive me of labour. I am informed 
by my men that they have already paid one "post tax"
the same as all others free people have paid about
two months since and I cannot imagine any 
other reason for his demanding another  to
deprive me of my labour.

As you may not like to interfere in this
matter I wish you would write to the Sultan to
leave my labourers tranquil until a decision has
arrived from the Chief of the Protectorate to whom I
have already written to upon this subject, also to inform
him that this estate is private and he has no right
to make disturbances have by sending armed men
upon the Estate.

I am sending to you M. Magney
my Chief Employer who is cognizant of all
of the facts with the two policemen of the Sultan
also my labourers who were prevented from
going to their work.

I have the honor to be
Your Obedient Servant
B. F. Wilson



Patsy Estate
Johanna 26 December 1888

A. E. B. Govea Esqr
Acting U.S. Consul
Zanzibar

Dear Sir

My last news
from you was on the 7th of August, I have
written to you by every mail (although not
officially) but hear nothing from you. I
am anxious to know the result of your
interview with His Highness Prince Said
Alli, the Sultans brother, as I know he
would tell what he knows now of his brother's
conduct towards me not being on friendly
terms with his brother. I was obliged
to go to Mayotte to meet the last mail from
Mauritius and on business. I there met
the said Said Alli and asked him again
if it was true what he had told me before
about the Sultan offering the French Resident
a sum of money if he would get me out
of the island and the Resident 
the offer and a paper was drawn up at
the time agreeing to give the said Resident
the money if he would do it. 



it was true. He said he did not like to swear
to before you when at Zanzibar because he
feared the French Resident but now the Resident
had left for France he would do it before
any body I wished him to. I thought it
not best to take him before any French
Authorities at Mayotte for that purpose
and there being no other nation represented
at Mayotte. I asked him to give me a 
document stating the facts and affix his
Seal to it and have a witness to it. This he
very willingly did and I have the honor
of enclosing it herewith with a translation
of the same made by the Interpreter and Translator
to the French Resident here. I should
think that this with all of the other documents
procured by me and the evidence taken
by Captain Harrington of the  when
here ought to  the U.S. Government
of the justice of my claims and demands
as an American Citizen. I claim to
be a Citizen of the United States and an honorable
one too and of unimpeachable character.
And have always well represented my
Country and as such I think I have
a right to demand protection and
my country should give it to me or



or give me some reason why I am
not entitled to respect and consideration
as an American. It is now four years
since I have made my complaint and
claims and not one word have I heard
from my Government. And I am sure
there is not one person who knows of my
treatment here but acknowledges the justness
of my claims. It is well known that when
I came upon this island that I did not come
here seeking a place but far from it I came
here as a passenger and companion of the
owner of the "E S "Twisden" Capt. E. W. Holmes of
the firm of G. S. Holmes &amp; Co of Cape Town. and
was induced by promises and written engagements 
made by the Sultan to remain here.
When he saw after my being here eight
years that I was prospering  through jealousy 
wished to make it so unpleasant for me
that I would abandon all of my hard
earnings to him and leave the island but
he has not succeeded as yet and when the
"Juniata" was here he tried to make it appear
that I had forfeited my right to American
Citizenship although he knew the contrary.
The American flag flies over all of my boats
and over my magazine at the beach and my












Translation

This paper is to say that we were at 
with Sultan Abdallah when Sultan Abdallah
called the Resident and told him to do all that
it was possible for him to do and take Doctor Wilson
out of the island and make him pay the money
he wished from Doctor Wilson and he would then
take the Patsy property and give it to his son
Salim bin Sultan Abdallah.

The Sultan agreed in our presence to give
the Resident Monsieur Troupel the sum of
forty thousand dollars if he would do that.
M. Troupel accepted this proposition and said
he would do it. Then Sultan Abdallah ordered
Salim his son to draw up a paper to that
effect which was done and we signed it as
witnesses Viz. Said Alli bin Sultan Salim Jaffa
(Minister) Salim bin Sultan Abdallah and Dayman
and the paper was put in the possession of
Monsieur Troupel.

Signed Said Allii bin Sultan Salim
(his Seal)

October 14th 1888

I am witness to Said Alli
signature
(signed) Mamed bin Ali



Patsy Estate - Johanna
27 February 1889

A. E. B. Govea Esqr
Acting U.S. Consul
Zanzibar

Dear Sir

I last wrote to you
on the 26th of December and since then have
not heard from you. I am anticipating
your letters by the mail  at Mayotte on
the 2nd of next month. I am
writing to you more particularly this time
to show you what the French Protectorate
amounts here so far as any one but
a French subject is concerned.

I applied to the Resident upon the 24th of
November and again on the 31st of December
for assistance and to bring to justice parties
for putting fires upon my estate and
destroying my young forest plantation. (Copies of my letter herewith enclosed)
The Resident did all that was necessary on
his part. (with the exception only of replying in
writing to my letters) (2 have not received one
word in writing from him). He came and
investigated this burnt land and a plan
of the Estate with the burnt land  was given
to him, and he said he considered it a
very serious offense and he wrote to the
Governor of Mayotte upon the subject and



asked for instructions to know how to proceed
in the matter. There has been three mails
from there since then but no note taken
of my complaint. I asked Mr 
what one could do and he replied the only
thing is to write to your Consul about it.

There was a sort of a  and 
of all of the labourers on Pomony Estate in .
Mr Semlay proprietor and English subject. He
applied for assistance and the Resident went
there and made some talk and reported
it to the Governor of Mayotte but he did
nothing about it and  was obliged
to yield to the labourers much to his
regret and to all others who pay for their
labour. His labourers have written a few
days demanded farther concessions.
In November Mr Semlay was obliged to
submit to them or loose his crop; There
was only a few who would not allow the
others to work.

To judge from the conduct of the
French Government it is evident that they
wish to drive all strangers out of the island
At  there is a large French Company
formed that has special privilege
granted by the Government and they were
granted by the French Minister in 
that no one but French subjects should be
allowed to have shares in the Company!



Of course that is not any one's business
but their own but it shows that they do
not wish strangers to their Government in
their islands.

We have a new Resident here now a 
Ormeries. I have called upon him and
forward him very pleasant and agreeable
He returned my call on the 25th and the
same day about one hour after he left
my residence another fire was put
into the grass and burnt over another
lot of young trees. I have not written
to him or reported it for the reason that
I see it is useless, and I believe these
last fires were put because I reported
the first ones to the Resident. I mustered
all the men on the place and put out the
fire before it had done a great deal of
damage. The facts are the Residents
have no power to do any thing for
me and the Governor of Mayotte does
not wish to.

I report these facts to you
and you may know of something to
do on the U.S. Government.

With nothing further I am
Your Obedient Servant
B. F. Wilson



Patsy Estate
Johanna 24th November 1888

Cornet Esqr
Acting French Resident
Johanna

Sir

It is with regret that I
am obliged to write to you the following
complaint viz: On Sunday last the 18th 
fire was put in the grass upon this estate, and
burnt over upwards of three hundred acres of
land. The majority of which was planted
with young trees and all were destroyed by the
fire. The fire extended so rapidly that my
residence and dependencies were at one time
in great danger. So much as that I was
obliged to have men upon them with water to
extinguish any fire that came.

My canes were also in great danger, and
Mr Magny was obliged to turn out all of the men
possible to fight the fire and prevent it entering
the canes.

The damage and anxiety gave
cannot well imagine not being present at the
time.

It is very well known by all of the Residents
upon this island that for the last ten years I have
been doing my utmost to get the bare mountains
covered with young trees, and have annually planted them



nearly every year some one puts fire into
the grass, and they are destroyed. Upon
some occasion when we have caught the persons
they have been punished lightly and let off. To
apply to the Sultan for assistance is useless, as he considers
it such a trifling affair, and not affecting his power.

Last year I had a man imprisoned for putting
fire: He escaped and went to the Sultan who protected
him from any punishment. Such persons
require to be severely dealt with, and it is for this
reason that I come to you trusting that justice
may be done. My patience is getting exhausted
in trying to cultivate trees, by having them year after
year burnt down. One of the men who put
this last fire I now have in prison: One other
escaped.

Trusting that you will investigate this
matter, and all the guilty properly punished.

And with much respect
I am
Your Obedient Servant
B. F. Wilson

P.S.

Knowing that you was very much occupied in
giving to  &amp; Pomory, and investigating
the affair of the revolutionists there is my excuse
for not writing to you before upon this subject.
I trust however you will have time to attend to it
before the departure of the boat for Mayotte on Thursday
next.

Yours &amp;c &amp;c
B. F. Wilson



Patsy Estate
Johanna 31 December 1888

Monsieur
Cornet
Resident Francais 
Johanna

Sir

I beg to inform you that
another fire was put in grass upon this estate
yesterday doing again great damage to young trees
planted by me. In this case it was one of my
who put the fire, and I have him in prison
here. If you could do as I would wish very much
you would send him to Mayotte, or  in goal
there for a term of five years, or longer if possible, as
an example to others. Although the amount of 
to not one half of what the first one was, I
sacrificed than to have had 
the  All of my  for factory use,
for construction, I would have been able to have
if not for the incendiaries. and from
own planting. There have also two more
fires been put but quenched by the incendiaries before I
could find the  inform me if there is
no prospect of  justice.

The Sultan will say that he  there, but
which he does . By the
promise of out putting any  they could probably be
from justice.

I have the honor to be
your obedient servant
B. F. Wilson




