







No. 28

Consulate of the United States,
Loanda, June 28 1892

Honorable Wm. F. Wharton
Assistant Secretary of State,
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have to acknowledge the receipt
of your instructions No. 12, dated
March 5, 1892, no. 13, dated April
6, 1892, and of your circulars dated
January 21, 30, February 2, 10, 15, 24,
26, and March 6, 9, 7, 19,16, which have had
due attention.

I also have to thank the Department 
for sending out new seals and 
furniture for the Consular office, which
have reached me in due course
of time. Unfortunately the panes
of the book-case were broken, one because
the weight of the glass had loosened
the wooden list holding it inside and which
was not sufficiently nailed, the other
because a board which had been nailed



inside got loose.

Hitherto the Governor General used
kindly to exempt Consular effects from
paying duty, but with the new tariff
he is no longer allowed to that, as
all the imports of the government are
now subjected to the common tariff.

Therefore the two last shipments above
mentioned had to be pay 20% ad
valorem, which however was not put 
too high.

I have the honor, Sir, to be
Your obedient servant
Heli Chatelain
U.S. Coml Agent

P.S. Enclosed please find a
circular of Jones &amp; Vorhees, which
may have previously come under your
notice; also extracts from a Kongo letter
which may be of interest.

Enclosures:

No. 1 Circular of Jones &amp; Voorhees

No. 2 Extracts from a letter of
Rev. J. Chester Hyde



Law Office of
Jones &amp; Voorhees,
1405 G Street.
John Paul Jones,
Reese H. Voorhees

Washington, D.C., April 15, 1892.

Dear Sir:

At the request of several gentleman in the Consular service we
have recently examine with care the "Revised Tariff of Official
Fees" as prescribed by Section 508 of the Regulations of 1888, and
have reached the conclusion that several of the items therein specified 
are erroneously and illegally classed as "official fees." If we
are correct in our view of the law these fees are personal emoluments
of the Consul and need not be accounted for to the Government. Our
attention was first especially directed to the fee for administering
the oath to emigrants for the free admission of their animals,
vehicles, and personal effects (Form 93), under the Act of 1883,
(Par. 677), but in the examination of the question we found it necessary 
to consider the whole subject of official and unofficial fees,
and we soon became convinced that under the Regulations many fees 
were accounted for which in reality belonged to the officer.

We are preparing, in connection with the firm of which ex-Senator 
Omar D. Conger, of Michigan, is a member, to bring a series of
suits in the United States Courts to test these various questions, 
and would be glad to act for you. If you will authorize us so to do,
by signing the annexed letter of authority, which need not be 
acknowledged, we will examine your accounts in the Department and
advise you as to what particular fees we think we can recover for you.

We would also be glad to profit by any suggestions which you may
have to make as to the official or unofficial character of any of the
fees which you are required by regulation or departmental custom
to account for.

We will not, in any event, use your case as a test one, and unless 
the Courts sustain our position, we will not even file your 
claim, but will return the power of attorney to you.



We will undertake these cases upon a purely contingent fee and
will not call upon you for any contribution, even towards expenses.
In view of this we think a fee of 33 1/3 per cent. of the amount recovered 
would be reasonable.

It will give us pleasure, if you desire it, to furnish you with
special references as to our professional standing, etc., but refer
generally to the Columbia National Bank and the Washington Loan and
Trust Company.

Very respectfully,
Jones &amp; Voorhees.

P.S. If the enclosed proposition is acceptable to you, please
your reply give us the dates of your consular service, continuous
or otherwise. We wold also esteem it a favor if you would give us
the name of your predecessor and his address, if known to you.



Know all Men by these Present, That &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; have made, constituted, and appointed, and by these presents do
make, constitute, and appoint John Paul Jones and Reese H. Voorhees,
and Omar D. Conger and Chilion P. Conger, either or both of them, my 
true and lawful attorneys, for me and in my name, place, and stead, to act for me
and on my
behalf, in the prosecution of whatever claim I may have against the United States
Government
on account of consular fees erroneously accounted for by me as "official fees."

Giving and granting unto my said attorney, or attorneys, full power and authority
to do and
perform every act and thing whatsoever requisite and necessary to be done in and about
the
premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as I might or could do if personally
present
at the doing thereof, with full power of substitution; and upon the settlement of
my said claim I
authorize my said attorneys, or either of them, to receive of the proper officers
of the Government
any and all original papers which may have been filed in support of my said claim,
and to 
receive the draft which may issue in payment thereof; Provided, that said draft is
made payable 
to my order, and not to the order of my said attorneys, or either of them, and to
forward
said original papers and said draft to me.

In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal this &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
day of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;, eighteen hundred and ninety-two.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; [SEAL.]

Two witnesses who can write:



Extracts from a letter of
Rev. J. Chester Hyde, M. X.

Equator, Congo State, April 27, 1892

There is an edict soon to be issued restraining all other 
than State flags except in neutral waters. The Dutch,
French &amp; English flags are not allowed now inland
of Matadi and at stations on the Upper Kongo, except
when the State flag is given preference at the top.

Mr. Greshoff (of the great Dutch African Trading Company)
removes the Dutch and substitutes the State flag when
landing at the State quarters.

The French authorities interdict the use of the
State flag on steamers starting from the French side.
Even canoes without State flags cannot pass Equator
station &amp; a Dutch steamer was fired on for trying 
to thus pass Bangalla.

As for the Belgian flag, it accompanies the
State flag on the Upper Kongo steamers, but is not
allowed on Buildings of the Railroad above Matadi.

I may give you some of my observations during
a visit to recruit my heath to the furthest Baptist
Mission station Upoto and the head Congo Balolo Mission 
station Bonginda on the Lulanga river.

As to currency, cash money is beginning to be
introduced with the advance of the railroad to Palabala,
The State receives only money for stamps and prefers
money for taxes; and we must pay coast labor partly
in cash, which is only obtained as 6%, whereas



natives will pay in cash for goods and make
allowance for loss beside a fair percentage.

Cloth is in demand everywhere. Brass wire is
a convenient currency from Lukungu to as far as I
have gone. Cloth can be sold to advantages all 
the way especially on the tributaries.

Very small white and blue beads are in demand
on the Lulanga, and large Mayacca or
white beads, the size of ordinary marbles, are in 
great demand at Upoto.

I am sorry to say that the State took off the
the tax on liquor with the 1st of January 1892, and
even with said tax gin in pint bottles was beginning 
to be the currency on the South as well
as the north bank of the Kongo.

Our postage is 50 centimes (10¢) per 15 grammes
(half ounce) for foreign and 25 centimes for domestic mail.

Ivory is especially sought on the Kassai and
rubber is bought in grant quantities at Luebo by
the Société Anonyme Belge.

Mr. Banks of this place has a beautiful and
substantial house of native woods, except the roof.
He makes tar for pressuring wood of gum copal 
to liquid and thinned with palm-oil. When put on
hot, it renders the surface  impervious to
water. He will make copal vanish when he
gets up linseed-oil. His roof is of European boa



covered with felt treated with this tar, and he
expects, by constantly covering the roof with the
preparation, to make it like one sheet of glass.

He has Medeira cherries, coffee, vegetable
, tomatoes, beans, lettuce, limes, ,
malakajas, paw-paws, pine-apples.

His wife is well, and has born him two little
ones while living here. Thirty natives have put
on Christ and been baptized quite recently.
The language is Lu-nkundu, the people are
Ba-lols. Fish are plentiful in the river, hippos
abound. A leopard was scented, and a smaller
animal seen last evening. The leopard had killed
five people already. Mr. Banks killed one before.
Monkeys are numerous.

At Frebu, Rev. C.G. Hartsock, A.B. of Brown
University lives with his wife together with Rev.
Thos. Moody and wife of Rochester, N.Y. The 
former is building a house of brick.

It is rumored that Arabs are pouring in to the head
waters of the Lopori and the "Commissaire" of this
district is now visiting that country in a steam
launch.

At Bangala the State authorities have placed
260 liberated boys under Roman Catholic Fathers
to the trained for terms of 5 or 7 years in case of 
the smartest with he understanding that 1/10
of them are to continue in the mission and



9/10 are to enter the service of the State. They
sing the Magnificat in Latin and the Belgian
national anthem in French; ask grace after and
before meals in the same and show themselves off
in the alphabet fairly well. They also distinguish
"papa fume sa pipe" one letter from another in
concert. Their training is very fair.

The State is constructing excellent buildings of
brick with tile roofs. The hospital is especially
fine, and the physician is so successful as to keep 
it nearly empty, while the deaths are few.

The woods of this country are very superior, being
now used in preference to any sent out from Norway.
Yet on the lower river and in the cataract district
we are compelled to send to Europe.

J. Chester Hyde, M.A.

Extracts from 
a letter of Rev. J. 
Chester Hyde 
about the Congo State

Enclosure No. 2
in Despatch No. 28




