







Recd Mch 5

No. 14

United States Commercial Agency
St Paul de Loanda October 22 1865

Sir;

On the 29th ult José Baptista de Andrade who had
been Governor General of the Province for the past three years
delivered over to the Government Council, the temporary charge
of this Government, until his successor should arrive out;
and sailed for Lisbon, on board of the Steamer "Lincolnshire" on the 3d inst.

Three years ago this Province was in a 
most deplorable state, the consequence of two years war
with the Native tribes on the frontier. The distance from
Loanda to that locality was about three hundred miles,
making it extremely difficult to transport munitions
of war, and the sickly climate, made it absolutely
impossible

Hon William H. Seward
Secretary of State
Washington. D.C.



impossible to preserve good, disciplined, 
troops to force these tribes into subjection. Overwhelming
numbers of Natives seriously threatened the safety
of what few troops were sent there and on two occasions
were defeated by them, in a general engagement. During
this state of affairs, the Commerce of the Provence
decreased very much indeed, and at one time almost
stopped. The then acting Governor General
(Calheiros) was seriously cautioned by the Public
and charged with imprudence and misjudgement
in allowing the war to reach such a climax when it
was not in his power to meet the emergencies of
the moment. His Majesty the King of Portugal
wisely appointed Captain José Baptista de Andrade
of the Portuguese Navy to relieve him; He arrived
here in September 1862. Governor Andrade
instituted the Olive Branch policy at the commencement
of his administration, and with
a



a firmness of action, worthy of the highest praise
he was enabled, during his term of service to accomplish
more real good than a force of 20,000 men
could have done. He brought the Native chiefs
to his feet imploring pardon. Confidence was
restored, Commerce blossomed afresh &amp; happiness
substituted misery. He established for himself
a name that many would envy. He left here
deeply regretted by all. I had the honor of
officially congratulating him, on his successful
administration. He was highly esteemed by all
loyal Americans, on this Coast, for his devotion
to the Federal cause &amp; during the darkest days
of the Rebellion was always ready to  us all
and to predict the final inglorious of defeat of the Confederates
and when this took place, no foreigner rejoiced more than he did.

I have the Honor to be
Your most Obdt Servt
Augustus Archer Silva
Commercial Agent



