







Recd 26 May

No 25

United States Commercial Agency
at Loanda 13th March 1862

Sir,

In compliance to Instructions
Chap 19 § 315 I have transmitted
to the Department of State copies of
an original correspondence I had
the honor to forward to the United
State Attorney of the County of
Suffolk Mass, having reference to
the murder recently took place
on board the American Ship "Clara
L. Preble"

Very respectfully
Your Obdt Servant
Robert Cunningham
Actg US Coml Agt

To the Honble
W. H. Seward
Secretary of State
&amp;c &amp;c &amp;c








United States Commercial Agency
at Loanda 13th March 1862

Sir

I have the honor to enclose
herewith in original an Affidavit of
Witnesses taken by me at this Commercial
Agency on the 8th Inst. for the Murder of
Lucius Fields by John Borges on board the
American Ship "Clara L. Preble" of Bath Me
which arrived at this Port on the 17th
Feby. last past Laden with Coals from Cardiff
England: the Crew shipped at the said Port
all being colored excepting the Master, Mate
and Carpenter, the prisoner and deceased
were colored and Citizens of the U.S.
Baltimore Maryland.

Referring to Instructions
Chap 19 § 315 requires two of the principal
witnesses to be sent home with the person
accused, the Vessel being short of men it
would

To The
United States Attorney
County of Suffolk
Mass
&amp;c &amp;c &amp;c



would be an impossibility to comply 
with the demands as the ship could not
proceed on her Voyage the particulars
relating to this case is mentioned in the
letter

I Robert Cunningham acting
U.S. Commercial Agent at Loanda, send
the prisoner home in the "Ann &amp; Mary" an
American Bark of Salem Francis Batbridge
Master bound direct from here to the
United States, the said Master bearning
a certificate from this Commercial Agency

With respect
Sir
Your Obdt Servant
Robert Cunningham
Acting U.S. Coml Agt








True Copy

Affidavit of Witnesses taken by
Robert Cunningham Acting United
States Commercial Agent at Loanda
for the Murder of Lucius Fields by
John Boges both Seamen on board the
American Ship "Clara L Preble" of Bath
Mr William K. Maxwell Master

1st Witness William K. Maxwell
Master of Ship "Clara L Preble."

On Sunday
2 March 1862 John Borges American
Citizen with Lucius Fields and three
others was on shore, gave them liberty
until 6 o'clock P.M. a little over their
time they came back to the Boat
together being in liquor went on board
the Ship "Clara L. Preble" and went to the
forecastle, about half an hour after, I was
called by the mate, saying there is a
quarrel in the forecastle and having
Knives out, I immediately went to
the forecastle saw John Borges with a
Sheath knife in his hand also saw
the deceased with a Razor in his



hand being stabbed in the left breast
bleeding freely I asked John Boges for
the Knife he immediately gave it to me
I also asked the deceased to give me the
Razor he refused, was obliged to take it
from him by force, soon after I saw
him lying on the deck, I gave orders for
him to be taken up and carried to the
forecastle I sent for the Doctor from the
Portuguese Steamer "Zaire," then Coaling
from my Ship and he was of opinion that
the Stab was mortal; I went aft and
then came forecastle in a few minutes,
the man was still alive I went aft again
and shortly after was told that he was
dead: during the voyage I have no reason
to suppose any ill feeling existed 
between the prisoner and deceased 
previously that should lead him to
commit the assault nor was he a 
disorderly man nor was the deceased 
after the deceased had been stabbed he
threatened to cut the prisoner being very
much intoxicated

(Signed) Wm K Maxwell of Brunswick Maine
Master Ship "Clara L. Preble"



2d Witness. Anthony F. Sampson British
Subject, Chief Officer Ship "Clara L. Preble

Prisoner and deceased
went on shore with Captain Maxwell and
returned on board a little after Sun Set,
the Carpenter Benjamin Rees reported to me
that two of the men were quarrelling in the
forecastle I went foreward and saw the
brandishing an open Razor and swore that
he would cut any person who interfered
or came near him using at the same
time very abusive language: the prisoner
asked me to take him away or he should
hurt him I could not say whether the
prisoner had or had not a Knife in his hand
I went and reported to Captain Maxwell that
the men were quarreling the Captain then
came foreward and went into the forecastle
Witness and Carpenter Benjamin Rees
followed the deceased had been stabbed but
was still brandishing the Razor as before
Captain and Witness endeavored to take the
Razor from him and suppress the quarrel,
the Carpenter Benjamin Rees then took



the Razor from the deceased, we then laid
him down, the Captain sent for the Doctor
of Steamer "Zaire" then Coaling from us, I
asked the prisoner if he was sorry for what
he did, he replied no and would do it again
dam him, let him die like a dog and I
will hang like a man, Witness said you
have done this under the influence of Liquor
and tomorrow you will be sorry for it
prisoner replied and said I am perfectly
sober. I have no reason to suppose any
ill feeling existed between the deceased
and prisoner previously.

(Signed) Anthony Field Sampson of Bristol
Resident of New York, Chief
Officer Ship "Clara L. Preble.



3. Witness Benjamin Rees British
Subject Carpenter Ship "Clara L. Preble"

Prisoner Came aft and
asked the mate to take the deceased from
the forecastle. I heard them quarreling
in the forecastle. I told the prisoner to leave
him alone as he was in liquor, seeing the
Captain and mate went foreward, I also
followed I then saw the deceased with a
Razor in his hand, and also noticed that
he had been stabbed I forced the Razor
out of the deceased hand, the Captain then
sent for medical aid from the Steamer
"Zaire" then Coaling from the Ship the
Doctor announced the Stab mortal, and
within half an hour the deceased received the 
wound he died. I do not know whether any
ill feeling existed between the prisoner and
deceased previous the latter was intoxicated

(signed) Benjamin Rees of Bristol Hot Wells
8 Victoria Place, England
Carpenter of Ship "Clara L. Preble."



4th Witness James H Hawkins
American Citizen Seamen of Ship
"Clara L. Preble"

Lucius Fields who was
in the Captain's Boat was on shore, when
he came on board it was dusk, he went
to the forecastle and took a Razor from
his pocket, which he brandished about
threatening the prisoner especially, and
making use of abusive language, the
prisoner told the deceased to leave him
which he refused to do brandishing the
Razor and made two cuts on prisoners 
left thumb (on his examination were visible) 
prisoner reached to a bunk and then with a
knife in his hand stabbed the deceased in
his left side, I then left the forecastle. I 
saw the Surgeon of the Steamer "Zaire"
there; shortly after saw Lucius Fields
dead: Knew of no ill feeling existing between
the deceased and prisoner I am not aware
if they were sober or not.

(Signed) James H. his†mark Hawkins of Balt
Maryland Federal Hill Chas St USA
Seaman Ship "Clara L. Preble"



1 Ques: by Prisoner.

2. Did you hear me ask the mate to
take the deceased out of the forecastle?

A. I heard you ask that Question as
the prisoner wished to have nothing 
to do with the deceased who was still 
brandishing the Razor

(Signed) James H his†mark Hawkins of Balt.
Maryland Federal Hill Chas St U.S.A

5th Witness. John Symonds Navigator
Island Seaman Ship Clara L Preble.

Witness spoke English extremely
imperfectly but corroborated all the main
points of the previous evidence as far as
could be possibly understood.

(Signed) John his†mark native South Sea
Island, Seamen Ship "Clara L Preble"



6th Witness John Thackster American
Citizen Seamen of Ship "Clara L. Preble"

I was sitting in the forecastle
about Sun Set deceased came on board
having been in attendance on the Captain
on shore, the deceased was in liquor, he
came into the forecastle with an opened
Razor is positive that it was opened I
left my seat when he was brandishing
the Razor for fear of getting cut, prisoner
came in at the time, deceased addressing
him, saying, I will cut the liver out of
you, the prisoner said go away my man I
dont want speak with you, you are in liquor
to night tomorrow morning if you
are a man I will speak with you the
deceased cut the prisoner on the thumb
he held out his hand to the deceased
and said see how you have cut me, one
of the Crew James Henry came into the
forecastle and persuaded the prisoner to
leave him, in hopes the deceased would
go to sleep. Witness thinks the prisoner
remained out about half an hour, he then
came in, leaning over his bunk, the deceased



deceased still abusing him and laid
hold of him with the Razor still opened in 
his hands prisoner said leave me alone I
dont want to have anything to do with you
we will settle it in the morning prisoner 
then went followed by the deceased the
latter still holding the Razor open in his
hand, they went out by the Starboard
door and both entered the forecastle again
by the Port door, the deceased continued
the same irritating abusive and threatening
language, prisoner asked John
Symonds to lend him his knife to cut
some meat the deceased continued in
the same manner abusing and brandishing
the Razor: when the prisoner stabbed the
deceased in the left side with the Knife he
staggered to his bunk and fell; medical
assistance was immediately sent for
he survived only about half an hour, I
have no reason to suppose any ill feeling
existed between the deceased and prisoner
when the prisoner went out as before stated
he came back with the mate, the mate
tried



tried to pacify the deceased but 
quite unable to do so.

(signed) John Thackster of Boston Mass
Seaman of Ship "Clara L. Preble.")

7th Witness William Boston American
Citizen Seaman of Ship "Clara L. Preble.

I was one of the Crew of the
Captains Boat having left the Ship after
dinner and remained on shore, waiting
on the Captain until Sun Set when we 
went of to the Ship I was sober the others
were in liquor more particularly the
deceased who was very much intoxicated
and getting out of the boat I helped him
up the side of the Ship do not think he could
get up without help. when I came out of the 
boat after making her fast I saw the deceased
in the Gally talking with the Cook. I told
him to go to the forecastle. he went there.
deceased then took a Razor from his
waistband and throwing both his hands
up threaten "to cut the prisoners Guts out"
prisoner told him frequently to go away



from him. deceased continued in the 
same threatening conduct for a quarter of 
an hour repeating the same words, but 
the razor was not opened the prisoner left
the forecastle for about five minutes and
then returned deceased repeated the
threats and language which he had
before used. Prisoner asked John
Symonds to lend him his Knife to cut
a piece of meat Symonds lent it to him
prisoner stood with the Knife in his hand
telling the other to desist and go away
deceased refused but rushed towards
him with his arms extended but holding
the Razor closed in his right hand, still
threatening the prisoner, he then stabbed the
deceased in the left side who reeled back
against a bunk Prisoner withdrew the
Knife the deceased continuing in the
same manner using abusive language
after he was stabbed. Prisoner said to
the deceased you need not fret any more
as you have had it into you (meaning 
the Knife). the prisoner then walks out of
the forecastle said he had done it for himself 



but could not keep it. I knew nothing 
more as I was ordered on shore by the
mate to the Consul and when I returned 
found that he had died

(Signed)William his†mark Boston of Balt.
Maryland La souse Alley, Seaman
of Ship "Clara L. Preble"

I the undersigned acting Commercial
Agent as hereby Certify the foregoing
is the true copy of genuine signatures of
Witnesses taken by me at this Commercial
Agency on the 8th March 1862

Given under my hand
and the Seal of this Commercial 
Agency in the year of our
Lord One thousand eight
hundred and sixty two

Robert Cunningham
Acting Coml Agent



