









XI. Africa.





Opening to Civilization.—Mr. Wm. Coppinger, Secretary of the American Colonization
Society, in his third annual statement, well says:

"There has never been a more intense and concentrated effort to open a continent than
is now directed towards Africa. From Algeria, from Egypt, from Zanzibar, from the
mouth of the Zambesi, from Natal, from Cape Colony, from Benguela, via Bihe, from
the Congo and the Ogove, the Niger, the St. Paul's, the Gambia and the Senegal, the
influences of exploration, commerce, missionary and colonization endeavor are penetrating
the vast interior with so much energy and success that, with whatever difficulties
and obstacles, the result cannot be doubtful. A few years will give access to the
immense and varied treasures of a magnificent quarter of the globe and bring its mighty
domain under the sway of Christian civilization."

Mr. Coppinger recognizes the energetic efforts of the French in connecting the upper
waters of the Niger with Senegal by railway; their project, still urged, for building
a railway across the desert from Algeria to Timbuctoo, and flooding parts of the desert;
and speaks of the rapid growth of French interests and influence in the African States
bordering on the Mediterranean; and of their bill before the Chamber of Deputies for
creating an African army of 58 battalions, 301 companies of infantry, 75 squadrons
of cavalry, and 13 batteries of artillery, with 90 guns, besides the engineer and
transport services.

The Portuguese, too, are developing fresh activity, establishing prominent stations
in all their African possessions, each with a military commander, having a staff composed
of a surgeon, chaplain, and a dozen or more carpenters, masons, farmers and other
master workmen—the first of these stations to be at Bihé, the point chosen for the
Mission of the A. B. C. F. M. The government of Portugal has contracted for a packet
service between Lisbon and Massamedes, the steamer to call at the intervening ports
along the West coast of Africa. The Italian government, too, is alive to African interests,
aiming to secure amicable relations with King John, of Abyssinia.





Liberia College.—We are glad to see Dr. Blyden seems intent on promoting the efficiency
of this college, at Monrovia. He is reported to have secured two able men, Rev. T.
McCants Stewart, Pastor of the Bethel African M. E. Church in Sullivan street, New
York, and Rev. H. M. Browne, to fill professorships. Mr. Browne, latterly supplying
the late Dr. Garnet's Shiloh Presbyterian Church in Twenty-sixth street, New York,
has also the appointment of U. S. Consul at Monrovia. We wish these brethren health
and long years of service, with great success in training young Liberians for usefulness.

Dr. Blyden, President of the College, reports increasing prosperity among the emigrants
who have gone from this country, and speaks of the prospects of Liberia with much
hopefulness. We notice that the bark Monrovia recently sailed from New York carrying
some 50 emigrants. Of the increasing commercial interests of Liberia, we notice that
the bark Monrovia, sailing thence the 14th of April last, brought 150,000 pounds of
coffee, with a good supply of other products, and another American vessel was loading
at the same time, to sail in a few days.





