







Copy

United States Commercial Agency
St. Paul de Loanda April 15th 1864

Sir

I had yesterday the honor to hold
some conversation with you concerning 
certain Kroomen left here by U.S. 
Ship "Sacramento" and I then made a request 
of you which I beg leave here to 
repeat, viz: to afford these Kroomen a 
passage to their home in Monrovia or 
vicinity, by H.M.S. "Dromedary" if compliance 
with this desire be not inconsistent 
with the service which that vessel is now 
engaged in. The peculiar circumstances 
of this matter will I trust be a sufficient 
apology for asking so great a favor at your 
hands. These men, twenty-six in number 
were shipped by Captain Napoleon Collins 
Commanding U.S.S. "Sacramento" for service 
on

Commander M. S. L. Peile
Commanding H.M.S. "Espoir"
Senior Officer, Southern Divn
H.B.M. African Squadron



on board that vessel during her passage 
down the coast to this port, where, as 
was expressly understood at the time of 
their shipment, they were to be discharged.
Upon arriving here they were accordingly 
discharged and sent on shore, 
with the prospect of obtaining a passage.
home by the first U.S. Vessel which should 
come here from the European Squadron.
But no such vessel has arrived since that 
time (2nd of March) and as far as I 
can learn there is no reason for expecting 
one soon. Meanwhile the Kroomen are 
becoming nearly destitute; they can find 
no work or favor from the Portuguese inhabitants 
of this city; and an official note
has been addressed to me in complaint 
of their presence in this city, and requesting 
me to make some proper disposition of them.
I am therefore compelled to appeal to you
and request a passage for them, to such 
point nearest their home as may be most 
convenient for H.M.S. "Dromedary" to land 
them.

I deeply regret the necessity which



occasions this great demand upon your 
kindness and trust you will find it 
within your power and convenience to 
comply with my request.

I have the honor
to be
Your Most Obt Servt
Signed, Augustus Archer Silva
Commercial Agent



