







Department of State Received Dec 28 1887

No. 13

United States Consulate
St. Paul de Loanda
November 14th 1887.

Mr Downing
To the Department of State

Subject:

Angola. Loanda.

Abstract of contents:

Commercial and agricultural
industries of Angola, description of
Loanda. Exports and imports.



No. 13

United States Consulate.
St Paul de Loanda.
November 14th, 1887.

Hon. James D. Porter
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have the honor to forward
to the Department the following:

Some years ago American
vessels had no difficulty in securing a
cargo of the products of this province. A trade
was growing between the United States and
Angola gathering every day more and more
in importance, but unfortunately for its
continuance, our troubles at home caused
its abandonment and, since then, it has
never been resumed.

The periodical arrival of
steamers and sailing vessels from Europe,
the building of railways and water works
by European capital, shows what value this 
province has in the eyes of commercial
Europe.



Europe.

There are five lines of steamers
running from European ports to Loanda, two
from England, two from Portugal and one 
from Germany.

The Portuguese steamers are
subsidized. Leaving Lisbon on the 6th of 
every month, calling at Madeira, St. Vincent, Banana, 
Princess Island, Ambriz, Loanda and
as far south as Mossamedes, taking about seventy
days to make the round voyage.

The English steamers leave
Liverpool about every three weeks, taking about
three months to make the round trip.

The German steamers are
irregular, seldom going south of Loanda.

Besides the above, the
Dutch Trading Company have a steamer
making about five round trips a year.

The arrival of sailing
vessels from England, Portugal, Germany,
France, and Holland are frequent, from the
United States, one about every eighteen months.

The principal imports
from each country are, cotton grade
woollen



woollen goods, hardware, crockery, machinery,
cutlery, powder, guns, provisions &amp;c, from
England; spirits, beer, guns, powder, hardware 
&amp;c, from Germany; flour, petroleum,
soap from America; wines, silks &amp;c. from
France. Most of these goods are sent
to Loanda via Lisbon, re-exported from
Portugal in Portugese vessels, there is a 
reduction in the import duties of 30%.

The exports are bee's wax, coffee,
cotton, cattle, hides, dried fish, gums, ivory,
india rubber, oils, orchella weed, palm
kernals sesame seed, tobacco and fibre.

Coffee is sent to Portugal,
Holland and Germany, cotton to England
and Portugal, bee's wax to England
Portugal and Holland, hides to Portugal,
ivory, rubber, orchella weed oils, palm
kernals, sesame seed, and tobacco to England
and Portugal, cattle and dried fish to
French and Portuguese dependencies.

The export duties is 3% on
shipments in Portugese vessels and 5% in 
foreign vessels. The differential duties does
not so much effect the manufacturing 
as



as the shipping industries.

The promise of Angola is one of
the most important on the African Coast. It
is rich in minerals and its soil is exceptionally
fertile.

Agriculture is in a progressive
condition. Large plantations of coffee and
sugar cane, owned by Europeans as well
as smaller ones, cultivated by the natives, line
the many rivers that irrigate the country.

Whether the United States would 
be benefited by taking part in the trade of
this coast, is worthy of consideration. There
are few, if any, articles imported into the
province, which we do not produce as
cheap, if not cheaper, than any country
with whom we would have to compete, nor
would we be more embarrassed by the
laws which regulate the collection of duties
than the most favored nation.

The city of Loanda contains
about fifteen thousand inhabitants, one
thousand of these are white, mostly convicts,
carpentering, brick laying, shoemaking,
tailoring, grogshop keeping are the
common



common avocations.

The city is divided into a 
lower and an upper town. The upper
town is built upon a hill surrounding one
side of the lower town which nestles at its
base along the shore, and it, with the harbor
formed by the beautiful bay, are over
shadowed by the walls of Fort St Miguel
which perched upon a bola precipice at
the waters edge, protects the port.

Many large and important
public buildings are in efficient working
order; a creditable public market building 
is busily occupied during the day
by buyers and sellers; a custom house,
situated near the water side and opposite 
to a large structure belonging to
the Department of Public Works, offers
every convenience for the rapid transaction 
of business. There are a number
of churches, but they are sparsely attended 
except on special occasions, a large
hospital capable of accommodating
eight hundred patients and having
a full staff of efficient officers and
nurses



nurses, is most happily located upon the hill.

The climate is unhealthy, many
deaths are caused by small-pox, a disease
common at the change of season. It is
impossible to learn how many die as the
records are very unreliable.

The streets of the lower city
are, as a rule, wide, but the sand
settling into them from the higher land,
has formed a deposit several inches in
depth of loose earth very hard to walk in.
There are several well paved roads running
from the lower to the upper city, where
are the Governor's palace, the prison, the
barracks, the treasury and other public 
offices, also an observatory where observation
of temperature, height of barometer, &amp;c., are
taken daily. The upper city, from being
exposed fully to the sea breeze, is the
healthiest part of the town.

There, are two newspapers
published, one weekly, one semi-weekly,
one is an official bulletin and the
other is devoted to general news.

There is a fair military
band



band which plays in a public garden
located in the upper town, three times
a week, with the exception of this
there are no public amusements.

Loanda is in telegraphic communication 
with Europe as well as with a 
number places in the interior. Telephones
in the city are in constant use.

The "Banco Nacional Ultramarino"
of Lisbon have a branch here as well as
others at Mossamedes and Benguella. It is
largely interested in the sugar and coffee
growing industries, holding mortgage on
many plantations on account of money
advanced to work the same.

Quite a large business is done
by the bank in the sale of its paper, as
a large general store business is done here
and in the up country for a currency having
only a local value and with which bank
paper is bought for use abroad.

Stores here with a stock of 
general merchandize, are numerous and
all of them seem to be doing a fair 
business. 

The



The cost of living in Loanda
is high, or dear; the cheapest accommodation
costing 2 Rs 500 i.e. $3.70/100 per diem.

Although large sales are made
in the city, yet Loanda is but a depot
for the supply of factories established in
the interior, at least eighty per cent of the
exports are purchased by factors employed 
by the merchants in the city.

On the banks of the Quanza
are the trading stations of Calumbo, Bruto,
Maximo, Massanga, Cambambe, Dondo, and
others. All of these are centres of trade for
many miles around them and are visited
twice a week by steamers plying between
them and Loanda as well as by an
overland mail every few days.

The output of the Quanza
District is very large, and taxes severely
the carrying capacity of the present
means of transportation, yet it is nothing
in comparison to what it will be, in
the near future, when the rail road becomes 
a factor in opening the interior.
Running for hundreds of mile through
an



an exceedingly rich, and fertile country, it
will cause many new industries to spring 
to life, not the least of which will be
the gathering of woods valuable for their
application to dye and furniture making.
New impetus will be given to the agricultural
industries, for whereas now inter-transportation 
is both expensive and difficult,
then the plantations being rapidly and
cheaply emptied of their products will
encourage the planters and farmers to 
exert themselves for larger profits.

The work of laying pipes
for the purpose of bringing the water of
the Bengo into Loanda is most satisfactorily
progressing and it is expected will be 
finished by next August.

During the year which ended
on the 30th of June 1887, 3288 passensers
arrived in Loanda and 2828 sailed from
the same place; of 122 vessels entered 54
were Portugese Steamers, and 40 were foreign, also
22 Portugese sailing vessels, and 6 foreign; those
that sailed were 57 Portugese Steamers and
40 Foreign; 25 Portugese sailing vessels and
6



foreign. Total tonnage of those entered 95,755
Tons; those sailed 98,734 Tons Value of Imports
was $1,034,938.50/100; the value of Exports was
$773,663.00/100.

I have the honor to be
Sir
Your obedient servant
Henry F. Downing,
U.S. Consul




