







Recd Dec 20
Duplicate

United States Coml Agency
St Paul 'd Loanda Aug 25, 1864.

Sir,

I have the honor to acknowledge
the receipt of Your despatches of May 13th &amp; 14th 
one requesting me to "continue to act as U.S. 
Commercial Agent for this Port," the one informing
me that the President had appointed
Mr A A Silva as Coml Agent."

Mr Silva not having signed any
Bonds, nor taken the oath &amp; also not having 
yet received his Commission, the Portuguese 
Authorities here could not recognise 
him as US C Agent. Neither do they recognise
me as such, but allow me to act as far as 
may be necessary in respect to the wants of 
American Vessels arriving at this port &amp; to 
keep charge of the Archives, Seal, flags &amp;c.

I now enclose the Returns from the 
Agency from Jany 1st to June 30th 1864. My 
reason for not doing so previous was, that as 
Mr Bradberry had died without appointing any
one to act for him, I was uncertain whether 
I had authority to make out the Returns, but
since the



Hon. Wm. H. Seward
Secretary of State
Washington D.C.





since the receipt of your despatch of May 13th 
I have given it my attention as pr the enclosed.
The several Accounts &amp; Certificates I have directed 
to the Treasury Department &amp; have drawn on 
the Hon. Secretary of the Treasury two Bills,
one for $84.16¢ the other for $247.00, being 
balance of Salary for the Quarter ending March 
31 &amp; June 30th 1864.

At the time Mr Bradberry died he was 
in debt to several persons here, but they do 
not expect to receive anything from his Estate.
I enclose to the Fifth Auditor an Account Current 
with vouchers showing that my demands 
amount to RS 300$975 in this currency, or in U.S.
Coin $201.32¢ With the exception of my 
private a/c RS 127$625 the rest is for Cash paid 
by me for his Medical Attendance &amp; Burial Expenses.
I have drawn on the Hon. Secretary of 
the Treasury for the Balance due Mr Bradberry 
at the time of his death $142.75 informing 
the Hon. Secretary of these circumstances &amp; trust 
that as this was for money expended in such 
a manner that the Draft will be duly honored.

Mr Bradberry in the Month of January 
last received $29.92¢ Balance Wages &amp; $31.91¢ Extra
Wages



Wages on account of a Colored Seaman named 
George Frank who was shipped in England on 
board the American Ship "Cumberland" &amp; was discharged 
here on account of sickness. By the Relief 
Book I notice he had paid on a/c $3.93¢. As I 
was not authorised to pay the balance of this 
amount to Geo. Frank who was a West Indian,
the English Counsul took him in charge &amp; sent 
him on board an English Vessel. I gave the 
English Consul notes of the a/c &amp; presume Your 
Honor has been notified of the same by the English 
Government.

In taking charge of Mr Bradberry effects 
not one cent was found in money &amp; I presume 
the money he received from Geo. Frank was 
remitted to Mr Bradberry family by a vessel 
that left this in January bound for Boston 
Mass. Mr B. calculating of course to make it 
up from the sale of his draft for the Quarter
ending March 31, 1864.

Circular No 44 is received &amp; in reply
will inform the Department that Commercial 
Agents as such, are not required to pay Taxes
in this port.  Circulars Nos 45 &amp; 46 are also received.
No vessel hailing from the Insurgent 
States



States has made their appearance in this 
port, neither is there anything shipped 
from here to those States.

There has been only one American 
Merchant Vessel arrived at this Port 
during the Quarter ending June 30, the 
cause of which is the high prices of 
Cotton Goods Rum, Powder &amp;c in the States, 
these being the principal articles formerly 
imported here. Two or three years since 
we used to have 8 or 10 vessels engaged 
in this Trade, but it has finally become 
reduced to this deplorable extent. The 
Merchants here &amp; on the Coast, who used 
to be very prompt in payment are now 
very backward, caused by Wars in the 
interior, overtrading &amp; undertaking more 
than they can carry out. a few Merchants 
of old standing continue to keep their 
credit good, but they do nothing near the 
amount of Business now that they used 
do. Loanda &amp; all allong this Coast has 
suffered severely from the Small Pox 
which first made its appearance in 
February last about 70 miles North of this 
at a



at a place called Kisembo. It is estimated 
that 4000 natives have died from its effects 
in Loanda alone. Very few Whites have 
been attacked yet with it.  It is said to be 
decreasing.

Mr Brookhouse of Salem Mass, the 
largest American Trader of this Coast has concluded 
to close his Buisness here. Messers Robison
Ridsont &amp; Roberts of Boston are left, but
from present appearances they will not send 
another vessel till the prospect is more promising.

The Mails from the States to this port 
are very irregular. for a few years past there 
has been a Line of Steamers from Lisbon to 
this Coast, but they are now discontinued. 
The Portuguese Government are endeavoring 
to get up another Line. The Mails via 
"Fernando Po" are brought here by the English 
vessels of War, but no certainty can be placed 
on their arrival.

It is my intention to leave this for the 
States in the course of two months. I understand 
Mr Silva intends leaving for England 
about the same time, with the intention of 
again



again returning here. On my departure 
I shall place the Archives &amp;c in charge of 
Mr Silva if he is here, but should he leave 
before me, or if we leave at same time, I 
shall then deliver the property of the United 
States now under my charge to the care of 
Mr. F A Silva, Brother of the appointed U.S. 
Commercial Agent.

John W Goodridge of Salem Mass, late
Master of the Brig "Morning Light" died at 
sea on board that Vessel on the 5th inst of 
Small Pox &amp; was buried at Loanda on the 
7th inst.

Very Respectfully
Your Obt Servt
John G Willis
Acting US C Agent



