







No Unknown
Department of State Aug 6 1888

United States Consulate
at St. Paul de Loanda
1st June 1888

Mr. J. L. Judson
To Department of State

Subject

Bond and Oath of Office



No Unknown

United States Consulate
at St. Paul de Loanda
1st June 1888

The Honorable
G. L. Rives
Assistant Secretary of State 
Washington D.C.

Sir

Judging that Mr. Henry F. Downing
late Consul at this place, has ere this
reported himself to the department and 
presented my nomination as Vice Consul
and presuming under the circumstance
that I have received the appointment in
order to obviate delay and much
inconvenience. I have this day executed 
my bond and taken the oath of office
as prescribed in the regulations both of 
which I enclose

I find from the regulations that unless
I take this course I cannot make out 
the quarterly returns of the Consulate
at the end of this quarter which is
very neat at hands

Trusting that my action in this
matter will meet the approval of the department.

I am, sir,
Your obedient servant
Julius L. Judson
Vice Consul

Enclosure No 1 Bond 
" " 2 Oath



Know all men by these Presents:

That we, Julius Leroy Judson, principal,
and Julio Augusto Maurão and
Vicente Roiz Facca, sureties,
are held and firmly bound to the United States of America in the sum
of two thousand dollars, money of the said United States, to the
payment whereof we bind ourselves, jointly and severally, our joint and several
heirs, executors, and administrators.

Witness our hands and seals this fifteenth day
of June, 1888.

The condition of the above obligations is such, That if the above
bounden Julius Leroy Judson, appointed Vice Consul of the United
States at St. Paul de Loanda
shall truly and faithfully discharge the duties of his said office according to law,
and shall also truly and faithfully account for, pay over, and deliver up, all 
moneys, goods, effects, books, papers, and other property which shall
come in to the hands of the said Julius Leroy Judson or to
the hands of any person for his use as such Vice Consul
under any law now or hereafter enacted, and that he will faithfully perform
all other duties now or hereafter lawfully imposed upon him as such
Vice Consul, then this obligation to be void,
otherwise, to remain in full force.

Julius Leroy Judson (seal)
Julio Augusto Maurão (seal)
Vicente Roiz Facca (seal)

Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of—
E. H. J. Davis
Archer Steel

The following instructions must be particularly observed and complied with:

1st. The Christian names must be written in the body of the bond in full, and so signed
to the bond:

2d. A seal to be attached to each signature.

3d. Each signature must be made in the presence of two persons, who must sign their
names as witnesses.

4th. The United States attorney of the district in which the sureties reside, or the
member of Congress for
the District, or one of the Senators of the State from which he is appointed, must
certify that they
are sufficient to pay the penalty of the bond, and are citizens and residents of the
United States.
This requirement being for the benefit of the Secretary of State, he may substitute
any other for it
in any particular case, in order to enable him to be satisfied of the sufficiency
of of sureties.

5th. Bond to be dated.



I, Julius Leroy Judson U.S. Vice 
Consul in and for St. Paul de Loanda and dependencies
hereby certify that Julius Augusto Maurão
and Vicente Roiz Facca, the sureties named in the
within bond, are severally sufficient to pay the penalty thereof, and that they
are residents of St. Paul de Loanda

Julius Leroy Judson

Dated at St. Paul de Loanda 1888



Oath of Allegiance and Office.

I, Julius Leroy Judson, of Georgia
appointed Vice Consul of the
United States at St. Paul de Loanda
do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United
States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without mental reservation

or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the
duties of the office on which I am about to enter: So help me God.

Julius Leroy Judson

Sworn and subscribed before me, a Vice U.S. Consul in and
for the St Paul, this 15 day
of June, A.D. 1888.

Julius Leroy Judson




