







Recd 24th March

Legation of the Republic of Liberia,
Yonkers, N.Y.

March 22nd, 1866.

I see by the newspapers that a Resolution
has been offered in the House of Representatives
of the U.S. "to discontinue an arrangement made
with Great Britain to keep a naval force on the
coast of Africa" on the assumption that the
slave trade has now ceased.

I have before me two letters from Liberia
recently received. One from W. S. Anderson dated
5th of Jany 1866 giving an account of a journey
made last year about ninety miles (in a straight
line) interiorward from Monrovia, in which he 
says he found the native Towns barricaded against
wars which were then prevailing, the sole object
of which was the capture of men, women and
children; the other from President Warner urging
me to endeavor to preserve by purchase on a  or
otherwise from the United States Government a
small gun steam vessel of not over one hundred
and twenty tons and intimates that the 
slave trade has not yet been suppressed by



within the lines of the Liberian Coast by the forces
employed by America and England, but 
would be, if Liberia had such small vessel.

I beg leave to recall to your notice a part
of the note which I had the honor to address
to you on the 1st of Nov. last as follows.

"You are aware that the late and lamented
President Lincoln recommended to Congress to sell
a small gun Boat to Liberia; I have been informed
that a bill to do so was passed by one house
but that Congress adjourned before action on it
was had in the other.

The United States having been at great expense
in maintaining vessels on the coast of Africa, to
suppress the slave trade, permit me to ask (in
consideration of the fact that the use of a small gun
boat by the government of Liberia would enable
them more easily to keep 500 miles of the coast
entirely free from that trade) whether the United
States could consistently lend, until by act of
Congress it could sell to Liberia on a credit, a small
gun boat of about one hundred tons, and there
promote one of its own cherished objects to so
great an extent, at so much smaller cost that



can be effected in any other manner."

Herewith please receive the late message
of the President of Liberia; in it is mentioned 
a treaty made with Portugal assimilating the
slave trade to piracy.

I have the honor to be, with
the highest consideration Sir your
most obedient servant

H M Schieffelin

Honble Wm H. Seward
Secretary of State
Washington D.C.




