







Department of State Received Jan 3 1888

No. 25

Consulate to the United States
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887

Mr. Pratt
To the Department of State

Subject:

Claim of Dr. B. F. Wilson
against King of Johanna

Abstract of Contents

Dr. B. F. Wilson's
grievance and enclosing
evidence bearing in case



No. 25

Consulate of the United States
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887.

Honorable James D. Porter
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have the honor to address
the Department at this 
time in relation to the claim
of Dr. B. F. Wilson against
Sultan Abdallah, King of 
Johanna.

This claim is of long
standing and the Department
has long since been 
made acquainted with particulars
of the same.

Dr. Wilson now appeals
again to the Government of
the United States through
the Department of State
for some relief from the
burden under which he 
is laboring.



To my own knowledge, he 
(Dr. Wilson) is virtually insolvent,
and is consequently
so pressed by his creditors
in all sides as to be seriously
hampered in the prosecution
of his business.

By his nurturing and
intelligent efforts he has
developed his sugar plantation
to such a state of
of perfection as to make it
(if unencumbered) a most desirable
property.

But with its present debt
it is quite impossible for
him to work it to a profit.

There is no doubt
that had the King of Johanna
not taken the contemptible
action he did to injure
his prospects he (Dr. Wilson)
would have been now in
a position to realize large
benefits from his imported
Estate.

In



In September 1885. When 
Commander P. F. Harrington
visited Johanna in the
"Juniata", he made enquiry
into the matter as far as
was possible but it was
very difficult to get any
one to go on board the
"Juniata" to testify against
the King. Knowing that at 
the moment the vessel left
they would be punished
for so doing.

Dr. Wilson has when
opportunity offered obtained
what evidence he could 
bearing in his case: and
I am sending the same
herewith, as per the subjoined 
list of enclosures.

When Captain Potter
was at Johanna in the
"Lancaster" in April of last
year he was inclined to
take some action in the
matter



matter. But the arrival 
of the French gunboat
"Chaeal" in the harbor bearing 
the Commandant of 
Mayotte with instructions
from his government to take
over the Protectorate of the
Island but a new phase
in the affair and the
"Lancaster" retired in good
order.

It would appear that
the King was coerced into
signing the treaty with the 
French in account of the
presence of an American
man o'war in port from
the fact that he afterwards
protested against receiving
the French resident who
was finally landed by
force in April of this year.

I am informed that
the President has recently
been negotiating a new
treaty



treaty with the King but I
have no idea what terms
have been made.

From all that I
have been able to learn,
Dr. Wilson's actual losses
by the King's interference
cannot be less than $300,000.

Besides which he has
been a sufferer from
defamation of character
and from attempts on
his life.

Perhaps it would
not be out of place for
me to say here that I
have yet to hear one word 
of derogation of his character
in business methods.
This among my acquaintances 
in Mauritius Réunion
Madagascar and elsewhere

If this were not the case.
I imagine that he would
long since have been
compelled



compelled to have retired
from the field.

Trusting that the
Department would give this
matter the attention to which
I believe it is entitled.

I have the right to be,
Sir,
Your Obedient Servant
Seth A. Pratt,
U. S. Consul

Enclosures:

No. 1. M. Humblot to Dr. Wilson
2. Hendletta &amp; Co. " " 
3. D. Bank Corporation " " 
4. A. B. D'Esta to " 
5. R. M. Dimley " " 
6.  " " 
7. D. Dupont to Laughlin &amp; Co.
8. Statement of Jas. Mitchell
9 . " " L. 
10. " " " "
11. " " L. 
12. " " Omer bin Said Allmi
13. " " Cubo Mohamad Fuber
14. " " Abderaman bin Abbas
15. " " Mohamad bin Allmi





I hereby certify that the foregoing 
is a correct copy of the original 
letter on file at this Consulate.

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



Copy

Translation

Johanna, 27th April 1886

Yes Doctor I remember very well that on the 20th inst, 
both to see the Commandant of Mayotte on his 
we have asked him, on behalf of the Captain of the U.S.S.
"Lancaster", to be good enough to call in your  Prince
Mohammed, so the Commandant could ascertain that the
letter received by Captain of "Lancaster" was not written by
Mohammed, and consequently was a false document.

The Commandant of Mayotte, although you had 
upon him to get the truth ascertained, would give to you no
other answer than, "let this matter drop: that is of no importance.

(Signed) L. Humblot, a naturalist, Office of 
the Academy, and in Mission for the Minister of Public
Instruction.

Correct translation
(signed) L. Humblot
L. Hermann
F. C. P.



12th July 1886

B. F. Wilson Esqr M.D.
Johanna

Dear Sir

With  to the
scandalous reports which we 
have been maliciously circulated in 
on your moral character, we have
pleasure in stating formally that having 
known you intimately for many years past
both in business and privately we are in a
position to declare solemnly and 
that all such  are utterly without
foundation and evidently spread with the
object of  you an injury

We remain Dear sir
Yours respectfully
(signed) Hendletta &amp; Co.
Merchants

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the original
letter in file at this Consulate

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul.

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887 



Oriental Bank Corporation in Liquidation 
Mauritius, 18th July, 1886.

B. F. Wilson Esqr, M.D.
of Johanna.

Dear Sir,

Regarding your Claim against the King of Johanna
for indemnity for the loss you have suffered through his
interference with your labor supply during the past four
years, we can say that we are well aware of the serious
injury done to you and ourselves by the large reduction in
the quantity of sugar produced by Patsy Estate resulting
from that interference.

It is quite certain that had the Sultan not 
compelled a large number of your labourers to leave your
employment with the object of crippling your operations,
you would ere this time have been able to repay us the
important advances of funds we made to you through Messrs
Hondlette &amp; Co. for the purpose of working your Estate. 
Your claim for indemnity is therefore clearly just 
and indisputable, and we trust the United States Government
will enforce its payment as soon as possible.

With reference to the representations which we
learn, have been made to your government by some evil
disposed persons, reflecting on your moral character, we can 
only say they are false and malicious. During the last
ten years we have been intimately acquainted with you: we 
have therefore had every opportunity of observing your
behavior both here and in Johanna, and weare bound
to



to say you have invariably conducted yourself as a 
gentleman of irreproachable character.

We remain, Dear Sir,
Yours Faithfully,
(Signed), For official Liquidator
of the Oriental Bank Corporation
By His Attorneys
J. A. Ferguson
A. Wemyss

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the original
letter in a file this Consulate.
Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate.
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



Copy 4/25

Domony, Johanna
May, 1887

Dear Doctor Wilson,

Having been requested to act as an expert in
estimating the damage you suffered through the acts of Sultan
Abdallah, and being personally acquainted with the affairs and
also with the unwarranted conduct of Sultan Abdallah, toward you,
I hereby state my opinion in the matter.

I know very well that the Sultan threatened
your life by giving orders to his armed men to shoot you when 
they would get a chance of doing so; as you did not give
them the opportunity, the plot failed, but it is nevertheless clear
that the detention in your house through threats of being shot at,
prevented you from attending to the work of your plantation, as well
as to any other business you may have had in hand. I have seen
also in your house several places where the boards had been cut
through by bullets fired in the night and evidently intended for
you.  I know also of the scuttling and sinking of your
steam launch while at her anchorage, and of the stealing of anchors
and chains in your boat shed, all acts perpetuated by the Sultan's
men and by his orders.

Regarding your labour, it is very well known to me and
to every one in the island that in year 1883 the Sultan took 
away some hundred free men who were working for you, and
gave orders to the Johannamen to withdraw from your employment
any and all the slaves they had in it.  This taking place while
you were in full crop interfered not only with that crop, but with
those that followed, as it prevented you from doing your planting
and



and many other important works.

From the quantities of sugar you made during the
preceding years, that is from 1879 to 1882 included, it is evident
that during that period your crops were increasing by about
one hundred tons every year.  In the year 1883, time of the 
Sultan's interference, you made only half the quantities of sugar
of the preceding year or three hundred tons less than you should
have made had you not been interfered with by the Sultan.

The following years, 1884 to 1888, show a slight increase 
but not in a ratio with the first alluded to (1879-1882), and I should
say that in those three last years (1884-1886) your yearly loss was 
as heavy as in 1883, or about three hundred tons yearly, making
a total loss for the four years 1882-1886, of twelve hundred tons 
which, at the Mauritius market prices during these years would
be worth, with interest, Rs. 300.000.

The above I consider to be as near as possible your losses
from the Sultan's interference with your labour in 1883 &amp; 1884, not
speaking of the aforementioned attempts at your life, &amp;c, and
the general inconvenience you were put to by such unwarrantable
acts.

Trusting that the U.S. Government will give to your
case all the attention it deserves, and that you may some day
be compensated for your losses,

I remain, Dear Doctor,
Very Sincerely Yours
(signed) A. B. d'Este
Manager of Pomony Estate, Johanna.



(Copy)

Mohilla, October 15th, 1887

Dr. Wilson M.D.
Patsy

Dear Sir,

In reply to your 
communication asking for any information
known to me concerning your late troubles
with the Sultan Abdallah and for which you are
claiming an indemnity. I can state that
your labour supply was almost entirely taken
away from you leaving scarcely sufficient
people to gather in your crop, thus neglecting
all necessary work for future years, such as
planting, hoeing, &amp;c. Knowing as I do the
progress made in yields during the first ten years
cultivation of virgin land. I can assert that
your loss must be have been enormous.

From the bullet holes I have seen in your house
which were made by the Sultan's soldiers when
passing through your estate I consider your
life to have been in great danger. Indeed
I know that it was so threaten that you
had to exercise great caution even in moving
round your house and entirely prevented
from attending to your outside work. No one
can entertain any doubt about your
losses under such circumstances and
I hope that your Government will give
you



you the satisfaction you deserve, as I
consider that you have been almost ruined

With best wishes
I remain
Yours very sincerely
(signed) Robt. M. Dimley.

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the original
letter on file at this consulate

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887













The English words struck out were added by me in error
instead of on the opposite page (Snd) 
(Signed) William Hill, Witness
L. Magny, 

(signed) Abdallah bin Zabar, Interpreter to the Resident of Johanna.









(Copy)

Mohilla, 12th Sept. 1885

To 
Dr B. F. Wilson,
Proprietor of Patsy Estate
Johanna

Dear Sir,

Having been compelled by force when
imprisoned at Baumbau by Sultan Abdallah to 
make a false statement concerning you, I now 
wish to declare and publish that that statement 
was false. It was written by Sultan Abdallah for
his own purpose and I was forced to sign it under
penalty of death if I did not. The statement
that he made me sign was that you had given
me money to hire men to go and fight for
Prince Mohammed and that you would pay
ten dollars per head for slaves and fifty dollars 
for free men and in case a slave died or was
killed you would pay fifty dollars to his master.

All this I now solemnly swear is false.
I wish here to state also I have often heard
Sultan Abdallah say that he intended to drive you
away from Johanna and take your plantation for
his own benefit and that of his own son Salim. I have
heard him avow this intention many times
previous to the outbreak of trouble between him
and his brother Prince Mohammed since
that occurred I was arrest and imprisoned
on Baumbau because I sympathized
with



with Prince Mohammed although I neither fought
for him nor assisted him in any way whatsoever.

I remain, Dear Sir
Yours Faithfully
(Signed) 



I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the Original
letter on file at this Consulate.

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



(Copy).

Mauritius 17th January, 1887.

Messrs Langlvis &amp; Co.
Merchants.

Dear Sir,

As you requested when I went to Johanna on behalf of
the Oriental Bank Corporation and the firm of  Houndlette &amp; Co to inspect
and report upon the Sultan's sugar estate at Bambau I thoroughly
inspected the estate "Patsy" belonging to Doctor Wilson. I found
"Patsy" estate very well managed indeed, the canes well cultivated,
and the plant of machinery in good order. I should judge that
Dr. Wilson will this coming season turn out about 400 tons of sugar,
and I see no reason why he should not go on increasing his 
production yearly, say from 75 to 100 tons until he makes 800 to 900
tons per annum. Dr. Wilson has done a great deal of hard and
intellectual work at Patsy, and it is my opinion that had his labour
supply not been interfered with by the Sultan since 1882 (when he made
527 tons of sugar) that he would have been making the 800 to 900 tons
annunally since /84.

Doctor Wilson's losses from the cause above alluded to, I
am sure cannot be less than one hundred thousand pounds sterling, taking
into consideration the heavy fall in prices of sugar since that time,
interest, &amp;c &amp;c, besides the loss of a certain quantity of canes abandoned 
and left in the ground, the latter taking from the soil the necessary
properties for future cultivation of them.

The French Protectorate will I hope and trust work well
for future operations as there is an abundance of labour on the island,
and the men want to work, but as it appears were only deterred
from doing so by the Sultan who evidently does not wish to see
foreigners



foreigners succeed in his island. With the Protectorate he will not
be allowed to interfere.

I do not consider that there is any risk whatever in
making advances to Dr Wilson for working his estate.

I remain, Dear Sir,
Your Obedient Servant
(Signed) D. Dupont

Sworn and subscribed to before one this thirteenth
day of June 1887.
Signed, Thomas T. Prentis
U. S. Consul,
Mauritius

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the Original
letter on file at this Consulate.

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul.

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



I hereby certify that I was present when Dr Wilson
made a settlement with Sultan Abdallah and heard
Sultan Abdallah insist upon Dr Wilson's paying him
interest for goods &amp;c. that he had had from the Sultan
from the date they were received until time of settlement,
had heard Dr Wilson protest, but he had to give in to
the Sultan in order to come to some settlement with him.
It was well known that the Sultan had agreed to
supply Dr Wilson with everything he required to make
a plantation without charging him anything until
his plantation was paying. This was offered him for
the services he rendered to the Sultan Abdallah.

(signed) James Mitchell
Port Louis, Mauritius
6th, February 1884

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a current copy of the original
statement on file at this consulate.

Seth A. Pratt,
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



(Copy.)

Johanna, 25th April, 1886.

Dr B. F. Wilson has made 514 tons of sugar in 1882. At the
commencement of the 1882 crop he was deprived of labour by
Sultan Abdallah, so that he could not extend his plantation,
and it has been invariably the same every year since that time
(1882) so that instead of increasing his production of sugar
yearly as he might have done had he had the required labour,
it has fallen off, so that his last crop was only 227 tons;
whereas he might have made, if not interfered with, 900 tons of 
sugar the last season: the estate being able to produce about
1500 tons of sugar, if all is put under cultivation.

It is a very easy matter for a crop to be largely reduced by
want of labour during one season: but it is very difficult, and
requires much time to increase it again. It will take Dr Wilson
at least four years to get his production of sugar what it
would have been had he not been interfered with.

I have had much experience on sugar plantations, being an
agricultural chemist, and I consider myself well able to judge 
in this case, having spent the last twelve years in sugar
colonies.

Another important consideration in connection with Dr Wilson's
losses is the fall in the price of sugars for the last two years,
which has been more than 30%; so even if Dr Wilson can
produce the same quantity of sugar as he had been able to 
produce before, he could not get the same profit.

(signed) L. Ehrmann
Analytical Chemist
Fellon Chemical Society,
F.C.1. (London.) 



Johanna, 25th April, 1886.

Ten days ago when the U.S.S. "Lancaster" was here, Captain 
Potter received from Sultan Abdallah a letter containing,
I have been told so, false statements against Dr Wilson,
and placing him under a very false position: this letter,
bearing the signature of Prince Mohommed. When Dr Wilson
knew this, he made some enquiries and learned positively
that Prince Mohommed never wrote the letter referred to, nor
any other letter to Captain Potter, but that this letter was
written by a fellow S. J. Abdallah, by his orders, and falsely
signed Mohommed. Having got this information, Dr Wilson
asked Captain Potter to send an officer with the letter to
Prince Mohammed to ascertain the fact. The "Lancaster" being
ready to sail and under steam, no officer could go on
shore, and Captain Potter referred Dr Wilson to the
Commandant of Mayotte who was on shore making
a treaty with S. Abdallah.

I was present when Dr Wilson asked the Commandant
of Mayotte to call Prince Mohamed and make an
enquiry on this letter falsely signed by him. Commandant
of Mayotte declined to make any enquiry.

(signed) L. Ehrmanns.

I hereby certify that the foregoing
is a correct copy of the original
statement on file at this Consulate

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul.

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



(Copy)

Mauritius, August 1st, 1886

I hereby certify that I was in Dr. Wilson's employ on
Patsy Estate for six years, and I have heard Sultan Abdallah
say on several occasions that he intended after Dr Wilson
had got his estate in good working condition, to drive Dr.
Wilson from the island, and get his estate away from him,
and give it to his son Salim. He also promised to make
me manager of the estate, if I would assist in getting Dr
Wilson into difficulties. I am personally acquainted with
Sultan Abdallah, and used to be very intimate with him.
He commenced to try and deprive Dr Wilson of labour in
1882 and took away all his own slaves first from Dr.
Wilson, and those of his Queen Boney Malala, about 50 in
number. He requested them to leave Patsy without
Dr Wilson's knowledge, and go to his garden at Jermanda
He then tried to get all Johannamen to take their slaves
from Dr Wilson's employ. At the same time he ordered
all free labourers to leave, which they did, as they were
afraid of the vengeance of the Sultan if they did not

(signed) L. Werber.
Subscribed and affirmed to this ninth
day of August, 1886.

(signed) Thomas T. Prentis
U.S. Consul
Port Louis

I hereby certify that the 
foregoing is a correct copy 
of the original statement 
in file at this consulate.

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul.

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887



(Copy)

Johanna 29 August, 1886.

I hereby certify that I was at Bambau and employed by
Sultan Abdallah for the last five or six years, and I am witness to
the bad statement that Sultan Abdallah has given to Johannamen
because they were friendly to Dr Wilson and because they would not
take their slaves away from his work when he ordered it, and swear
to lies to injure him.

I have also often heard Sultan Abdallah say that he would drive
Dr Wilson from the island, and take his plantation from him.

I was present also when his soldiers came and reported that
they had sunk Dr. Wilson's steamer, and witnessed the great pleasure he
expressed at the feat. The soldier that headed this last business was a 
slave of his by name Ramiela. I also know that the anchor stolen
from Dr Wilson was done by Sultan Abdallah's orders and given to the 
Captain of his  by the name of Moon Waley.

I was witness also at Sultan Abdallah sending the slave
Maragook away, so he could not be a witness of Dr Wilson's.

I am also a witness that the report of  is a correct
statement.

Witness to signatures:
(signé) William Hill
" George Esson
" Cembo Mohamed Zaber.

Certifié exact, et les signatures Hill, Esson
et Cembo Mohamed Zaber
(signé) Le Resident de France


I hereby certify that the foregoing is a
correct copy of the original statement in
file at this Consulate.

Seth A Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887.



(Copy.)

Mayotte, September 26th, 1886.

I hereby certify that I was in the employ of Dr B. F. Wilson, proprietor
of Patsy Estate when the Sultan Abdallah and his brother Mohamed were
quarreling and fighting, and I was requested to leave the work of Dr Wilson
with many others of his employees, but this I declined to do, when
Sultan Abdallah sent an armed force to the estate of Dr Wilson and
caused me to go to Baumbau, where I was beaten and chained in irons
for sixteen days, and badly treated otherwise, because I would not swear
to lies to injure Dr Wilson: but this I was at least obliged to do to save
my life, and now, being free, I am glad to be able to speak the truth.

Sultan Abdallah has often said he intended to get Dr. Wilson
into trouble and then drive him from the Island, so he could get his
plantation for his son Salim. When Dr Wilson wente to the Sultan
and requested him to send me back to the work, he wrote Dr Wilson
that I refused to go. This is not true: I wished to go but he refused
to allow me to. When the "Juniata" was in Johanna he told
Captain Harrington that he had sent to Mayotte for one to come
to Johanna as a witness: this is also not true; he never wrote to me
at all.

These statements are facts.
(signed) Cobo Mohamed Zuban

Certifie exacte le signature ci-dessus
(signed) Le Resident de France


I hereby certify that the foregoing is a correct
copy of the original statement on file at
this Consulate.

Seth A Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887.



(Copy)

I Drayman Abass do hereby solemnly
swear and affirm that I acted as Prince Mohamed
bin Sultan's agent in procuring arms and ammunition
for him before the late rebellion in this island. I applied
on several occasions to Dr Wilson for assistance
which he invariably and firmly refused to give me.
Saying he was on "" and would have nothing
to do with the matter. I then heard of Mr. Delonza
going to Zanzibar and employed him to execute
the Commission for me. When the arms &amp; ammunition
arrived here I asked for Dr Wilson's permission to store
them in his magazine. This he positively refused to 
grant me and they were in consequence carried
on to Mayotte and horse Bi and when they came back
here I had Prince Mohamed's boat ready to take
delivery of the whole with the exception of a few
packages which I put into a Mohd's boat.

I was authorized by Prince Mohamed to procure
arms for him the best way I could as he considered
his life to be in danger. Dr Wilson never gave me
a single thing to assist Prince Mohamed with.

I knew he did not like the Sultan Abdallah
for the reason of his having interfering with his
labour supply and other things and I used
every endeavor to induce him to aid me
in carrying out my plans but without
success. When Sultan Abdallah's soldiers
attempted to take possession from Dr Wilson of
a  laden with Paddy I tried then to 
persuade him



persuade him to help me but he refused to .

I know that Dr Wilson possessed a few 
to arm his  and Corporals with in case of
trouble on his estate and I tried hard to get some
of them from him but never succeeded in getting
not even one to carry myself.

(Signed) 

William Hill witness
(here also an Indian. signature)

Le Resident de France a Anjou
Certifie que le signature ci-dessus est bien celle
du nommé Abderaman bin Abas que s'est
présenté dans nos bureau et a requet le present
certificant

Mousamondou 12 April 1887
(Signed) Le Resident de France


I hereby certify that the foregoing 
is a correct copy of the original
statement on file at this Consulate.

Seth A. Pratt
U.S. Consul

U.S. Consulate.
Zanzibar, November 10, 1887.




