







No. 29
Department of State Received Aug 29 1892

Consulate of the United States,
Loanda, June 29 1892

Mr. Heli Chatelain
To the Department of State.

Subject:

Requesting leave of absence
to the United States

Abstract of Contents.



No. 29

Consulate of the United States,
Loanda, June 29 1892

Honorable Wm. F. Wharton
Assistant Secretary of State,
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

For the reasons enumerated below
I take the liberty to request the Department 
to grant me a furlough to
the United States, for the maximum
time allowable and to begin as soon 
as suitable to me in the early part
of 1893.

(1) Angola offers at the present time
one of the most promising fields for
American enterprise. Simple Consular
reports are not sufficient to induce American
capitalists to invest money in a country
so far and unknown. It requires personal 
conversation to inspire confidence in the
informant and to organize a commercial
undertaking. The first condition of important 
commercial relation between



America and Africa is the presence in
Africa of reliable American firms. When 
once set a-rolling the ball will soon 
become an avalanche. Mr. Hart, of the Geo.
Squire Mfctg. Co. Buffalo, N.Y., has
been here a few weeks, and has already from
the Loanda District alone, orders for more
than $20.000 of agricultural machinery and
the promise much more in the near
future. On similar and other lives, American
firms and individuals could do as well and
better, if well represented on the spot.

Two German commercial travelers who canvassed 
Angola a year ago got orders for
about $200,000 and since then German
imports are seriously competing with the
English.

(2) The Consular reports from this field
shall not suffer by my furlough, as
by correspondence with my friends here and
by the papers of the Province, I shall be
as well informed in America, and able
to supplement any information in greater
detail.

(3) The Chicago Congress on African ethnology



in connection with the Expedition, the publication
of my large work on Angolan ethnology, especially
on folk-lore, which is the most important contribution 
to that branch of science ever yet written,
and which is sure to give haste to the above-mentioned 
Congress, and various other scientific
meetings, associations and publications will be 
greatly benefited by my presence, even for a
short time, in America.

(4) Last, but not least, my physical constitution 
will, by that time need the bracing
influence of a more temperate climate, and
my heart and mind some heathenism and corruption of
all sorts.

Trusting my request will be granted,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant
Heli Chatelain
U.S. Coml Agent




