







No 35 13

United States Consulate
St Paul de Loanda
September 30th 1882.

Hon. J.C. Bancroft Davis
Asst. Sectry. of State
Washington D.C.


Sir,

I have the honor most respectfully to state that
Capt. of Frigate, Ferreira do Amaral Francison
Joaquim has been appointed governor general
of Angola and arrived here by the last mail
steamer from Lisbon, he is accompanied by his
wife, and the aid .

Governor Amaral is, as I must judge by his
friendly reception of me and by the good wishes
he has towards Americans, determined to help
the American traders and commerce on this 
Coast. A railroad is much needed, and a 
free grant of land for 99 years can be 
obtained by any american company willing
to invest some capital. The country is very
rich but has no developments. In all the 
reports I am now collecting and my own 
personal judgment which will be forwarded 
to the state department for my quarter
ending December 1882.  will be able
to see what a R. R. company here


would be able to realize in 10 years; a 
great profit would consequently be the 
result and new spirit put in this wealthy
but forgotten country.

Governor Amaral while talking to me
about Americans, its commerce, trade, 
goods  mentioned that it was strange
that a nation so well known would still
keep whole guadrous in countries and
ports where there was no need of such;
and that in his belief an am: man of
war was needed at least twice a year
on this craft, his Excellency Ideas on this
matter is supported by every one I know,
and in my conversation with several
natives chiefs and trades on this coast
I have been told the following.

"You call yourself a representative of a great
country were all kinds of goods abound,
but where are they? You say that your
nation is greater and larger then
Holland, France, England, how can
you prove it to us. The English have 
plenty men of was along this coast,
Dutch, French and English goods are
daily coming by the English mail
and other merchants vessels. On the


Coast you see nothing but English Trading 
Houses, and the goods we are now wearing
are English. Why then if your country is so
Big as you mention and has so much time
goods gun powder   that you do not
bring some to us to see, and trade: Why
do you not put in our country American
trading houses; protect them, and be friend 
to them, and if you have such great
ships as England has  big guns.
Why not let us them them"

I have the honor to be
Sir 
Your obedient servant
L de R. du Verge
U.S. Consul



