







Department of State Received Aug 31 1882

Ackd Oct. 20/82

No 11 6

United States Consulate
St. Paul de Loanda
S.W.C. Africa

L. de R. du Verge
to Dept of State
Washington D.C.

Subject

Acting governor &amp;a. and receipt of
Circulars and unofficial.

Encloses

Miscellaneous account of City &amp;a.







No 12 6.

United States Consulate
St Paul de Loanda
June 30th 1882.

The Hon. J. C. Bancroft Davis
Asst. Secretary of State
Washington D.C.


Sir

Since the death of General Dantas Govr Genl
of Angola and the provinces, "Joseph," Lord Bishop
of Angola, has been the acting governor and
President of the Council composed of four;
Two british gun boats and a corvette left here
for the Cape of Good Hope, St Helena, and Sth
America. The Irish Earl of Mayo with 
two others, left for Mossamedes and  "Huïlla"
the new "Boër" settlement in the Portuguese
possession of the South West Coast of Africa.
on a supposed shooting and british geographical
expedition; We have now in Port, one frigate
two corvettes and a Portuguese gun boat the 
latter will leave for the Congo on the 5th of 
July. The city of Loanda is for the present
in a very sickly state, and the billious fever
now existing is very dangerous for Europeans
who have resided here for a few years, The



change of air further North or South is highly
recommanded by the principal physicians
of this place. The living in St Paul de 
Loanda is very high, and a man; particularly
a consul here with only $1000. a year, can
only prevent himself from starving, as the
agency attached to this consulate and
mentioned by Mr Swellon A. Brown does 
not exist any more.

Kerosene oil, American lumber of all sorts,
Naval stores, Lard, Butter; cans stores, Hams
Bacon, salted beef and Pork in half Barrels
cheap Furniture, good flour in half barrels
are now in great demand; I believe that
a vessel of 200 to 250 tons with the above
mentioned articles would realize a very
good profit and find a return cargo.

The Portugese Govt. have in custody a man
named J. B. Silveira citizen born in the
U.S. and who was once U.S. Consul at
Lisbon, as soon as I will be able to find
out more about him and his case will
notify your Departt In Loango there
is two Americans traders Messrs Parks and 
Marsins, the latter a Sea Captn who lost



his vessel at that place under very suspicious
circumstances, I am told that in "Cabinda"
Benguela, Mossamedes and four other small
places on the coast a few americans are now
trading, and that great many americans
Whalers call at thoses places for provisions
&amp;a and in many instances, the crew are
put on shore if they do not suit, or in 
most cases run away from their vessel
for ill treatment; the consequences are;
that they generally come upon this consulate
for support as destitute steamer.

I would respectfully suggest that I may
be authorized to appoint Consular agents
all over the coast from Gaboon, as far 
as Great Fish bay, beside the Islands
of Fernando Po, Princess, St Thomé &amp; Annaboa. 
I have also applied to the
Medical and other authorities to give
me if possible a weekly return of 
sickness and deseases existing, beside
the list of import and export to this
port, also to gentlemen in Benguela
Mossamedes, Bengo, Ambriz and other
ports for a plain statement of their



their Coffee, Cocoa, Sugar, Rum and 
Cotton factories.

If the State Department would allow
me to call at those places once and 
while, I believe that I would be able
to give you and your Departt a full
and correct statement of everything 
of interest and valuable to the United
States Government and its different
Departments beside promoting its
commerce

I have the honor to be
Sir
Your obedient servant
L. de R. du Verge
U.S. Consul



