







Department of State Received Dec 21 1886

12 Pall Mall SW.

Your Excellency,

I have the honour to forward
Your Excellency copies of despatches,
respectively addressed, to the Prime
Minister of Madagascar &amp; myself
to His Excellency the French Minister
for Foreign Affairs.

As Ambassador of H.M. the
Queen of Madagascar to the

To His Excellency,
The President of the United States 
of America
&amp;c &amp;c &amp;c    



Treaty Powers, it is clearly my duty
to those Powers &amp; to Her Majesty,
in view of the past &amp; present time 
of policy pursued by the Government 
of the French Republic in
reference to Madagascar, &amp; the 
attitude of protection it has 
assumed over our independent
Sovereign State, to take this immediate 
occasion to adopt the 
peremptory measure of acquainting 
the Powers, that no Protectorate
of any kind whatever, has ever  



been ceded to France by the Queen 
of Madagascar or Her Government, 
&amp;, as my despatch to
M. de Freycinet confirms, &amp; rather
than acknowledge the Protectorate
claimed by France, Her Majesty's
Government will advise Her
Majesty to appeal to the nation 
whether he shall, or, not
resort again to the arbitrament
of arms.

I make no comment  



upon the conduct of the Government 
of the French Republic, or reflection 
upon its policy. I 
state, without hesitation, the
unalterable resolve of Madagascar 
not to allow the internal 
administration of her
Kingdom to be interfered with.

I may, however, benefit explain 
that the ratification of
the Treaty of Peace of 17th
December, 1885, (a printed



copy of which I now submit)
was made absolutely dependent upon 
the receipt beforehand of the 
explanatory letter (in the nature 
of a protocol) of the Representatives 
for the French Republic,
as the examination of the 
dates &amp; circumstances will
incontestably prove. Of course
if the French Government repudiate
the letter &amp; postscript
of their Representative, upon the    



faith of which the Treaty was concluded,
the Malagasy Government, on the other 
hand, have the right to look upon
the Treaty as null &amp; void.  

The Government of the French
Republic is in the singular
position of putting upon a Treaty
a construction opposed to that 
which her own Plenipotentiaries
have placed on record as
conveying the precise meaning 
of the text. The letter of the



Representatives for the French Republic 
is in the nature of a Protocol &amp; must
be held to conclusively settle the
meaning of the Treaty.

Finally, I leave it to the world at
large to decide, whether, when the two 
letters—namely—the letter now called
the Appendix to Her Treaty, handed  by
the French Representatives to me, as the
Malagasy Plenipotentiary, &amp; my exchange
letter, or Convention, given to them—
are compared, whether, I repeat it, the



last named letter, ie, the Secret
Treaty, is not more than a
fair quid pro quo for the
former.

I have the honour to be
with the highest consideration
You Excellency's
Most obedient 
humble servant
Digby Willoughby Genl
Ambassador from the Queen of Madagascar.



Copy

12 Pall Mall S.W.
12 November 1886

Your Excellency

France &amp; Madagascar
are at serious variance respecting
the interpretation of the Treaty of Peace
of the 17th December 1885 &amp; its Appendix
dated 9th of January 1886.
This Treaty, Your Excellency is
quite cognizant, was ratified
by myself, on behalf of the Queen
of Madagascar, on the 10th of January
1886, having previously received
as the sole condition of my ratification
the letter of interpretation or Appendix
dated 9th of January 1886 &amp; signed

A Son Excellence 
Mons de Freycinet
Ministre des Affaires Etrangeres
Paris



by the Represenatives for the French
Republic. Notwithstanding the
self congratulations of the French
Press, that the Prime Minister of
Madagascar had succumbed to the
pressure brought to bear upon him
by France—to which I give an 
unqualified denial. I regret that
I am constrained to inform you
that the differences alluded to are
bound to endure whilst France
deems it fit to pursue, through
her Agents in Madagascar, a
policy of bewilderment, &amp; to treat
the Queens Envoy in Europe &amp; the
bearer of gifts to the President of the 
French Republic in a temporizing
manner. A policy of inactivity
lacking, as it does, clearness &amp;



resolution, will neither 
nor  the difficulty.
I have visited France to confer
with your Excellency, &amp; to come to a
friendly understanding. When
prepared as , &amp; am now to
look the difficulties straight in the
face, &amp; if possible, to overcome them
I have met with nothing but
want of resolution on the part of the
French Cabinet.

By the last mail the Prime
Minister of Madagascar sent me
an open letter addressed to Your
Excellency, but has left it to me
as the Malagasy Ambassador
to use my discretion in forwarding
it to its destination. It is the 
latest, &amp; most emphatic expression
of the



of the unalterable opinion of the
Queen &amp; Her Government. It is
briefly to this effect. The Queen
will not allow any interference
on the part of the French Agent, in the
internal administration of the
Kingdom of Madagascar, in 
such points as raising 
to leasing of Customs dues &amp;c &amp;c
&amp; rather than admit such interference
will again go to the nation to 
ascertain the national will. What
the issue of such action will be
I prefer to  to the surmise of
Your Excellency 
is that hostilities will be recommended
&amp; when Your Excellency considers
that Madagascar is not in the
same position that she was before
the



the late war but that her rational
power, &amp; defensive resources are
greatly superior, the conflict, which
appears to me imminent, will be 
long uncertain costly, &amp; sanguinary
were it not the friend of France
that I have always professed to be
I should not now be hastening to
discover to you the real state of
diplomatic relations.

Having warned Your Excellency 
I now adjure you, in the interests
of civilization, for the bonds of France
to pause before unsheathing the
sword &amp; pointing it at the breast
of a nation that has already
sacrificed so much, &amp; whose desire
it is to fulfil to the letter, on her side
the obligations of the Treaty which
she has entered into with French
I shall



I shall be prefered to call on
Your Excellency, at the Quai d'Orsay,
in an official capacity anytime
within the two next weeks.

In conclusion, Your Excellency
has full permission to make 
public this, or any part of this,
letter as you may think fit, in
any of the official  of the French
Press.

I have the honor to be
Your Excellency's
Most obedient Servant,
(signed) Digby Willoughby 
Gent.
Ambassador of the Queen of 
Madagascar



Malagasy Treaty and Appendix.

Treaty of Peace
Between
France and Madagascar.

The Government of the French Republic and that
of the Queen of Madagascar, desiring to prevent at
any future time the recurrence of the difficulties
which have recently arisen, and wishing moreover
to draw closer their former relations of friendship,
have resolved to conclude a convention to that end,
and have appointed as their plenipotentiaries:—

For the French Republic:

M. Paul Emile Miot, Rear Admiral Commanding
in Chief the Naval Division of the Indian Ocean.

M. Salivator Patrimonio, Minister Plenipotentiary.

For the Government of Her Majesty the Queen of
Madagascar:

General Digby Willoughby, General Officer Commanding
the Malagasy troops, and Minister Plenipotentiary.

Who after having exchanged their full powers and 
found them in good and due form, have agreed to
the following articles under reserve of ratification:—

ART: I.

The Government of the Republic will represent
Madagascar in all its foreign relations. Malagasy
abroad will be placed under the protection of France.

ART: II.

A resident representing the Government of the
Republic will preside over the foreign relations of
Madagascar, without interfering in the internal
administration of the States of Her Majesty the
Queen.

ART: III.

He will reside at Antananarivo with a military
escort. The Resident will have the right of private 
and personal audience of Her Majesty the Queen.

ART: IV.

The authorities dependent on the Queen will not
interfere in disputes between Frenchmen or between
Frenchmen and foreigners. Differences between
Frenchmen and Malagasy shall be tried by the
Resident with the assistance of a Malagasy judge.

ART: V.

Frenchmen shall be subject to the law of France
for the repression of all crimes and offences committed
by them in Madagascar.

ART: VI.

French citizens will be free to reside, to circulate,
and to trade without let or hindrance throughout
the extent of the Queen's dominions. They will
have the faculty of hiring for an undetermined
period on hereditary leases renewable on the mere
agreement of the parties, lands, houses, store houses,
and every description of real estate. They will
be able to choose freely and take into their service 
in any capacity whatever any Malagasy not bound
by a previous engagement. Leases and contracts
for the hiring of labourers shall be drawn up by duly
certified deeds before the French Resident and the
magistrates of the country, and the strict performance 
of the same will be guaranteed by the
Government.

In the even of a Frenchman dying during his
tenancy of an estate, his heir shall come into immediate
possession under the lease for such time as it
may have to run, and will have the faculty of



renewing the same. Frenchmen shall not be subject
to any other land taxes than those paid by Malagasy.

It will not be lawful for any one to enter the tenements,
enclosures, establishments, or houses occupied
by Frenchmen or persons in their service save with
their consent and the assent of the Resident.

ART: VII.

Her Majesty the Queen of Madagascar expressly
confirms the guarantees stipulated by the Treaty of
August 7, 1886, in behalf of freedom of conscience
and religious tolerance.

ART: VIII.

The Queen's Government undertakes to pay the
sum of ten millions of francs, to be applied equally
to the settlement of the French claims liquidated
previous to the conflict between the two parties, and
to the reparation of any damage caused to foreigners
by the said conflict. The examination and settlement
of these indemnities will devolve upon the
French Government.

ART: IX.

Until the full payment of the said sum of ten
millions of francs Tamatave will be occupied by 
French troops.

ART: X.

No claim shall be admitted in respect of any
measures taken up to this day by the French Military
authorities.

ART: XI.

The Government of the Republic undertakes to
provide assistance to the Queen of Madagascar for
the defence of her dominions.

ART: XII.

Her Majesty the Queen of Madagascar will continue
as heretofore to preside over the internal
administration of the whole island.

ART: XIII.

In consideration of the engagement entered into
by Her Majesty the Queen the Government of the
Republic foregoes and renounces any claim for a war
indemnity.

ART: XIV.

The Government of the Republic, with a view to
promote the advance of the Malagasy Government
and people in the paths of progress and civilisation,
undertakes to place at the disposal of the Queen
those military instructors, engineers, professors, and
foremen of works that may be required.

ART: XV.

The Queen's Government undertakes expressly to
treat with kindness the Sakalava and the Antakaratra,
and to take into account the suggestions
which it will receive in relation to this matter from
the Government of the Republic. But the Government
of the Republic reserves to itself the right of 
occupying the Bay of Diego Suarez, and of creating
such establishments there as may suit its convenience.

ART: XVI.

The President of the Republic and Her Majesty
the Queen of Madagascar grant a full general and
plenary amnesty, and remove the sequestration
placed upon the real and personal estate of those of
their respective subjects who, up to the time of the
conclusion of the present Treaty, and at any previous
period, may have become compromised in the
service of either contracting party.

ART: XVII.

The Treaties and Conventions at present existing
between the Government of the Republic and that of
Her Majesty the Queen of Madagascar are expressly
confirmed in such of their provisions as are not
contrary to these present stipulations.



ART: XVIII.

The present Treaty having been drawn up in
French and in Malagasy, and the two versions
having exactly the same sense, the French text will
be official and will be conclusive in all respects as
well as the Malagasy text.

ART: XIX.

The present Treaty will be ratified within a period
of there months, or sooner if it be possible.

Done in duplicate on board the "Naïade" in
Tamatave Roads; December 17, 1885.

The Minister Plenipotentiary of the French Republic.

(Signed) S. Patrimonio.

The Rear Admiral Commanding in Chief the Naval
Division in the India Ocean.

(Signed) E. Miot.

The Minister Plenipotentiary of the Queen of
Madagascar, General Officer Commanding the
Malagasy troops.

(Signed) Digby Willoughby. General.

By virtue of the special full-powers here annexed
with which I am provided, I, the undersigned,
Digby Willoughby, General Officer Commanding
the Malagasy forces, Envoy Extraordinary and
minister Plenipotentiary, ratify, in the name of Her
Majesty, Ranavalona III., Queen of Madagascar, the
above Treaty of Peace, signed on the 17th day of
December, 1885, between the French Plenipotentiaries
and myself.

In the roads of Tamatave on board the "Naïade,"
the 10th of January, 1886.

(Signed) Digby Willoughby, General.

(Signed) Ranavalomanjaka, Queen of Madagascar.

(Signed) Rainilaiarivony, Prime Minister and Commander in Chief.

On board the Naïade.

Tamatave, Jan. 9, 1886.

Monsieur le Plenipotentiaire,

In compliance with the desire which you have
been good enough to express, and in order to remove
the doubts manifested by the Malagasy Government
relative to the interpretation of certain expressions
of the text of the Treaty of the 17th of December
1885, we are willing by consent to furnish you with
the following explanations:

His Excellency the Prime Minister has ordered
you to define the meaning of paragraph 1, of Article 
II of the Treaty, which says:

"A Resident representing the Government of the
Republic will preside over the foreign relations."

This means that the Resident will have the right
to interfere in matters having the character of foreign
politics; that he will have he right, for instance, to
oppose any cession of territory to any foreign nation
whatever; any Military and Naval establishments;
or the allowing of any assistance, in men or vessels,
asked for by the Government of the Queen of 
Madagascar, being granted without the consent of the
French Government.

No Treaty, Agreement, or Convention can be
made without the approval of the French Government.

By Article III. of the Treaty it is stipulated that
the "Resident will reside at Antananarivo with a
military escort."

The Prime Minister wishes to know what we mean
by military escort. We consent to state that "escort"
does not mean "corps d'armée;" and to define
more precisely, we engage that this escort shall not
exceed 50 men, cavalry or infantry. This escort will
not enter into the interior of the Palace.



In Article VI. the expression "lease by emphy
ansis" means a special lease for 99 years, renewable
at the will of the parties.

In paragraph 3 of the same article stipulating that
French citizens will be able to choose freely and
take into their service in any capacity whatever any
Malagasy not bound by a previous engagement, we have
necessarily meant to exclude soldiers and slaves, since
soldiers and slaves have, more than any one else,
engaged their persons.

We think that the Government of Her Majesty
the Queen have not to complain of this omission. It
was conceived in a feeling of kindness for Her, for
we thought it preferable that such expressions
should not figure in the text of a Treaty of this 
importance.

In the same manner the clause by virtue of which
"the Goverment of the Queen of Madagascar undertakes
to pay the sum of ten millions of francs to be
applied equally to the settlement of the French
claims liquidated previous to the conflict between
the two parties, and to the reparation of any damage
caused to foreigners by the said conflict,"—we meant
the damages caused before and during the war up to
the day of signing of the Treaty of peace.

The Government of the Republic will evidently 
not lend its assistance to the Queen of Madagascar
for the defence of Her dominions, unless such
assistance is asked for by Her Majesty the Queen.

With regard to the meaning of Article XV. it 
appears to us sufficiently clear and precise to necessitate
any further comment. The advantages which
it stipulates in favour of the Government of Her 
Majesty the Queen are evident, as it will be easy to
prove to the Prime Minister when we go to the 
Capital.

With regard to the territory necessary for the 
operations which the Government of the Republic 
will carry on at its convenience, in the Bay of Diego
Suarez, we believe we are able to assert that it will
not exceed a mile and a half on the entire south of 
the Bay, as well as around the east and west, and
four miles round the north outline of the bay,
starting from the most extreme northerly point of
said bay.

It is superfluous to add that at Diego Suarez the
French authorities will not afford refuge to Malagasy
subjects in a state of desertion or who cannot
produce a passport from the Malagasy authorities.

In fact in the carying out of the full, general, and
plenary amnesty, and the removal of the sequestration
placed upon the property of the respective
subjects of the two contracting parties, the Government
of Her Majesty the Queen will be inspired by
the same feelings of loyalty and justice which we
have a right to expect from the experience and
enlightened mind of His Excellency the Prime
Minister.

Accept, Monsieur le Plenipotentiare, the assurance
of our high esteem.

(Signed) S. Patrimonio, Minister Plenipotentiary.

(Signed) E. Miot. Vice Admiral, Commander in Chief.

P.S. You have asked us whether the Queen's 
Government may, as heretofore, continue to negotiate
Commercial Treaties with foreign powers.

Undoubtedly, as far as such. Commercial Treaties
are not contrary to the stipulations of thee treaty of
the 17th December 1885.

(Signed) S. Patrimonio, Minister Plenipotentiary.

(Signed) E. Miot, Vice Admiral.

General Willoughby, General Officer commanding the
Malagasy troops, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of H. M. the Queen of Madagascar.




