







Department of State Received Jun 30 1885

United States Consulate
Loanda 10 April 1885

Sir,

I have the honor to inform you that on the
18th of March last, Bishop W. Taylor accompanied by
18 men 7 women and 16 children, arrived 
here in the "Biafra" British Mail Steamer from
Liverpool.

They have come from the United States to
establish Missions, in this Colony which have for
their object the teaching of the natives, not only in
religious matters but also in Industrial pursuits

The Governor General being at present
absent from Loanda, I could not present the
Bishop to him, he however will return at the
end of this month and I shall then do so.
I do not anticipate any objection on his part to
the Mission, but on the contrary think that he
will render them such assistance as lays in
his province, to establish themselves and will
extend his protection to them so long as
they confine themselves to the objects they
ostensibly purpose.

My impression is that a Mission
composed as this is, of so great a number of
people including so many women and children
coming



coming to this Colony is not a well advised measure
They come here as a "self-supporting" mission to a
country entirely unknown to them, and unfortunately
without the apparent requisite means to make their
mission a success. Their funds are very meagre
to commence with and the Country is not one
to give immediate returns as in their case is
necessary.

The son of the Bishop, Mr Ross Taylor leaves
by this Mail "Corisco" for Liverpool taking with him
his wife (who has been ill since her arrival here)
and four children. Another member of the 
Mission a Mr MacKay also is anxious to leave
through ill health, but has not the means to do
so. Other members are suffering from the effects of
the climate and I very much doubt if their
condition will improve when they get up country
and have only themselves and their own efforts
to depend upon.

They have fixed on two sites some three
hundred miles from here, in the interior, selected by
one of their member Dr Somers and as soon as they
get the permission of the Governor General several
of the members will move to them.

I have the honor to be
Sir



Sir
Your most obedient Servant
Robt S. Newton
US Vice Consul.

To The
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington D.C.




