





The Conference at Berlin on the West-African Question.

Daniel De Leon


irrelevant to author's discussion




The discussion on the subject of freedom of commerce on the coast of Angola, thus
raised by M. de Marigny in Africa, and transferred to Europe by the timidity of the
Portuguese Commander at Cabinda, gave rise to a protracted discussion between the
cabinets of Lisbon and Versailles. The Portuguese court claimed right of sovereignty
at Cabinda, and all accessory rights; and in aggrieved tones it demanded reparation
for the insult done to the honor of its flag. The French court, on the other hand,
without entering on the question of Portuguese rights of sovereignty, refused all
reparation; and it stood firm on the right of its subjects to the freedom of commerce
with the whole of West Africa, claiming that that right had been acquired by them
by long and uninterrupted exercise.




irrelevant to author's discussion




The recognition by France of Portuguese sovereignty over
the coast of Cabinda, and the indirect recognition of that sovereignty
over the rest of Angola, did not, however, quite fill the
measure of the wishes of the cabinet of Lisbon; and it was found
necessary to subjoin a protocol to the above convention and
declarations. In this protocol the plenipotentiary of Portugal
set forth that, it being the desire and the object of his master
to define the limits of French commerce on the whole coast of
Angola, he therefore proposed, with the view of avoiding fresh
disputes in the future, that it be agreed that the said commerce
should never extend to the southward beyond the Zarre and
Cape Padron. The plenipotentiary of France observed that
the commerce of the French in those regions should not be
limited more than was that of the English and the Hollanders,
who extended theirs as far south as the rivers Ambriz and
Mossula.




irrelevant to author's discussion




Portugal could not consent to recognize in any other nation a right to traffic on
said coast, unless it be on that portion which lay north of Zaire; to the south of
that river and of Cape Padron only Portuguese subjects were allowed to trade; and
Portugal looked upon all other commerce or navigation, which the subjects of any nation
whatever might have tried to establish in those regions, as furtive, clandestine and
illicit, such traffic and navigation never having been authorized by Portugal, and
that country never having lent its assent to such traffic.




irrelevant to author's discussion




In order to settle the disputes about sovereignty at the mouth of the Congo, to provide
for the complete extinction of the slave trade and to promote civilization and commerce
in Africa—so runs the preamble of this treaty—it was stipulated that Great Britain
recognized the sovereignty of Portugal over the western coast of Africa, between the
fifth degree, twelfth minute, and the eighth degree south latitude, and inland on
the Congo as far as Nokki.




irrelevant to author's discussion




Nothing daunted by the resistance he was encountering at home, Bismarck had continued
to pursue his policy abroad. His quick eye perceived that the state of the Congo controversy,
after the treaty of Feb. 26, 1884, and the claims that had been set up by the International
Association, offered him a rare opportunity to turn to profit the location of the
island of Fernando Po, and to secure free access to the interior of Africa for German
industry.




irrelevant to author's discussion




