







President Snubs Belgium's King.

Roosevelt Refuses to Invite Leopold to Visit United States.

Trouble Over The Congo

Fear of Establishing a Precedent Also Prevents Call by President of Mexico.





Washington, D. C., Feb. 1. -- [Special.] -- President Roosevelt has refused to extend
an invitation to King Leopold of Belgium to visit the United States.

The president's refusal followed an unomcial intimation that the king contemplated
coming to this country to observe and meet the American people. No suggestion was
advanced that one of his objects was to prevent action by the United States in connection
with the amelioration of the conditions in the Congo Free State. That this was in
the king's mind there is no doubt. Even if he had come, however, it is extremely doubtful
if he would have been able to influence the policy of the administration.

As a result of an exhaustive investigation made by American consular representatives
in the Congo. Secretary Root has made vigorous representations to the Belgian sovereign
looking to the adoption of radically different methods in the treatment of natives.
These representations have been made almost simultaneously with those to the same
effect offered by Great Britain.

Pressure from Two Nations.

King Leopold is now undergoing pressure from two great nations who propose to see
that practical slavery shall be abolished from the Congo region and that natives there
shall have an opportunity to enjoy blessings which modern civilization ought to bring
to them.

Important as is the action of the president and Secretary Root in intervening in the
African question, it is of course not in any way as sensational as the refusal of
the president to welcome King Leopold to this country.

The authorities are reticent about discussing the details connected with the proposed
visit of his majesty, and high Belgian diplomats assert that the condition of the
health of their ruler would not permit him to undertake such an arduous trip at this
time. They point out that he is now 73 years of age and that he could not comfortably
make the voyage. It is admitted, however, that four years ago the king contemplated
coming here, but finally decided it would be unwise.

Aside from the reputation his majesty has achieved both as a ruler of the Congo and
as a man, he has a charming personality and is most courteous to Americans whom he
chances to meet. In spite of his age he has a splendid physique, and his mind is as
clear as a bell. He resents emphatically the charges that his administration has been
detrimental to the natives of the Congo region, and he has insisted that the British
lust of territory is directly responsible for the campaign which has been made against
him and his officials.

Investigation Is Made.

His majesty's point of view is not that or the American representatives in the Congo
Free State. At the instance of congress Secretary Root appointed Clarence R. Slocum
consul general at Boma more than two years ago, and directed him to report upon conditions
in the vast Congo territory. Mr. Slocum was stricken with fever and was transferred,
his place being taken by James A. Smith of Michigan, for some years consul at Leghorn,
Italy. As vice consul, Mr. Root appointed a young newspaper man, Lucien Memminger.
The two agents were ordered to carry out the instructions given to Mr. Slocum. Their
report was received recently by Secretary Root and was carefully considered by him
and laid before President Roosevelt, with a recommendation for action.

While the United States has no treaty rights of intervention, it has been able to
act in connection with the Congo question on the broad ground of humanity. The reports
of the American agents establish clearly that a condition exists which should be corrected
without delay. These reports are confidential, but it is expected that they will be
made public within a reasonable time. It is possible they may be ultimately presented
to King Leopold in support of the representations which the American minister at Brussels
has been directed to make.

Both Mr. Smith and Mr. Memminger found that the government was not such as to bring
happiness to the people and they both concluded that something must be done in their
behalf. To what extent they dwelt upon the alleged cruelties that have been perpetrated
in the Congo is not known. That these cruelties have occurred is beyond question.

Missionaries Ask Investigation.

The Belgian authorities assert that the natives themselves have committed atrocities
upon one another, but independent observers, and especially the American missionaries,
say this is evading the truth. Some time ago a memorial was presented to congress
by various American missionary societies, praying that an investigation be made of
the existing conditions in the Congo state, and that steps be taken to ameliorate
and correct evils from which the people were suffering. There are between twenty and
thirty million Congoese, and it is alleged that they have suffered grossly from wrongs
of malgovernment.

The king has appreciated the probability of foreign intervention and he has sought
to ameliorate conditions in the Congo also to interest foreign financiers whose influence
would be valuable in preventing action.

In this country, J. Pierpont Morgan and Thomas F. Ryan were induced to accept india
rubber concessions. The king also has deemed it advisable to transfer the Congo to
the Belgian government. 

In connection with the Congo question, it must never be forgotten that King Leopold
exercises an independent sovereignty over the African region which has no relation
whatever to Belgium. He proposed more than a year ago that the territory be transferred
to Belgium as a colony, but the conditions he imposed were not acceptable to the Belgian
parliament.

King Scored by Parliament.

The king's proposition was exhaustively discussed in parliament and members and speakers
characterized the administration as "an enormous and continual butchery." It is understood
the king has agreed to modify the conditions, especially with relation to the private
domain he possesses and which at first he intended to reserve for his continued personal
exploitation. The parliament probably will pass a resolution this winter agreeing
to receive the territory.

All these facts concerning the Congo have been known to the president. It is doubtful
if they had much influence upon his decision not to receive King Leopold, though it
is certain that he did not care to discuss the subject directly with him. The refusal
is understood to have been couched in most delicate language.

The suggestion that the king should come was made in a purely unofficial manner, and
it is probable that an attempt will be made to deny officially that it was advanced.
Nevertheless it is true that it was submitted, and President Roosevelt could not see
his way clear to extend an invitation to the king to come. 


Irrelevent to discussion








