







Commercial Agency
Kongo Free State 
Bena-Kamba, Lomami River
April 17th, 1893.

To the Honorable
Assistant Secretary of State
Washington, D.C.

Sir:

I have the honor to report my arrival 
at Bena-Kamba April 10th &amp; that
on the 14th joining the Expedition against
the Arab Slave dealers. As I desired greatly
to see the part of the Kongo Free State
occupied by the Arabs, it being considered 
the richest and most populous
and as it was impossible to visit this
this section unless with a strong expedition, 
Commandant Chaltin invited me to 
go with him as a guest, and as stated
in my letter of March 17th (no number)
I accepted. Upon arrival at Bena-Kamba
he told me three of his officers were 
obiged to return to Basoko, sick, one
with small pox, one with dysentery
&amp; one with malignant hemateuric fever
&amp; asked me if, as a favor, I would
act as one of his officers. Under the 
peculiar circumstances I accepted the 
proposition, and am commanding his 
two Krupp Field Cannon and one 
hundred soldiers. Of course it is 
quite understood that I shall not 
accept any remuneration from the
Kongo Free State.

This Lomami River was opened last 
year in the month of March by the 
"Syndicat du Katanga" of Brussels with
Mr. A. Hodister at its head. They 
established



established. Trading Stations, or Factoryo, at
the following  Yanga, Bena-Kamba
&amp; Lomo in the Lomami, and at Kibongo
Riba-Ruba and Nyangone in the High 
Kongo, or Loulaba River. After these places
were founded and stocked with goods to 
the value of over $250,000.00 the Arabs
attacked them, killing the agents at Loma
&amp; Riba-Riba &amp; Mr. Hodister with four
white ccompanions on the road from
Bena Kemba to Riba-Ribe. The 
other agents at the different factories
heard this and made their escape to 
Stanley Falls. The State agent at Riba-Riba 
was tortured to death. All the 
factories were burned and the cloths,
beads, money etc taken. 

This January they have killed the two 
State Agents at Kassongo, so the Government 
organized one Expedition from
Lusambo in the Sankuru River to proceed 
against Nyangone &amp; Kassongo &amp;
one to go from Basoko to the Lomami
&amp; destroy Chari, Bena Kamba &amp; Riba-Riba 
&amp; Kibonge. The situation now
stands:

Lieutenant Dhanis from Lusambo, occupies
Nyangone &amp; is marching to Kassongo with
four hundred soldiers and many hundreds
of natives who have voluntarily joined
him. Captain Chaltin has destroyed
Chari, a town of 1000 houses and a 
population estimated at 15000 persons
and on the 20th instant starts for
Riba-Riba with four hundred soldiers
&amp; expects to be re-enforced by the natives
on the road.

In the River Lomani we have been in many 
villages destroyed by the Arabs in their slave
raids



was, and in two places the headless bodies
of men, women, and children were found,
These people are simply devasting Central
Africa, but I think the energetic measures
the Government are now taking will put
a stop to this nefarious traffic, at least
for a long time, in the territory of the 
state.  

At the present I can only give the merest
survey to this slave business, but in 
my final report will dwell upon it to
a greater extent.

I am, Sir,
Very respectfully
R. Dorsey Mohun
Commercial Agent




